
NARRATIVE

The advantage of laying before the reader, in the words of the actors
themselves, the adventures which we must otherwise have narrated in
our own, has given great popularity to the publication of epistolary
correspondence, as practised by various great authors, and by ourselves
in the preceding chapters. Nevertheless, a genuine correspondence of
this kind (and Heaven forbid it should be in any respect sophisticated
by interpolations of our own!) can seldom be found to contain all in
which it is necessary to instruct the reader for his full comprehension
of the story. Also it must often happen that various prolixities and
redundancies occur in the course of an interchange of letters, which
must hang as a dead weight on the progress of the narrative. To avoid
this dilemma, some biographers have used the letters of the personages
concerned, or liberal extracts from them, to describe particular
incidents, or express the sentiments which they entertained; while they
connect them occasionally with such portions of narrative, as may serve
to carry on the thread of the story.

It is thus that the adventurous travellers who explore the summit of
Mont Blanc now move on through the crumbling snowdrift so slowly, that
their progress is almost imperceptible, and anon abridge their journey
by springing over the intervening chasms which cross their path, with
the assistance of their pilgrim-staves. Or, to make a briefer simile,
the course of story-telling which we have for the present adopted,
resembles the original discipline of the dragoons, who were trained to
serve either on foot or horseback, as the emergencies of the service
required. With this explanation, we shall proceed to narrate some
circumstances which Alan Fairford did not, and could not, write to his
correspondent.

Our reader, we trust, has formed somewhat approaching to a distinct
idea of the principal characters who have appeared before him during
our narrative; but in case our good opinion of his sagacity has been
exaggerated, and in order to satisfy such as are addicted to the
laudable practice of SKIPPING (with whom we have at times a strong
fellow-feeling), the following particulars may not be superfluous.

Mr. Saunders Fairford, as he was usually called, was a man of business
of the old school, moderate in his charges, economical and even
niggardly in his expenditure, strictly honest in conducting his own
affairs and those of his clients, but taught by long experience to be
wary and suspicious in observing the motions of others. Punctual as the
clock of Saint Giles tolled nine, the neat dapper form of the little
hale old gentleman was seen at the threshold of the court hall, or at
farthest, at the head of the Back Stairs, trimly dressed in a complete
suit of snuff-coloured brown, with stockings of silk or woollen as,
suited the weather; a bob-wig, and a small cocked hat; shoes blacked
as Warren would have blacked them; silver shoe-buckles, and a gold
stock-buckle. A nosegay in summer, and a sprig of holly in winter,
completed his well-known dress and appearance. His manners corresponded
with his attire, for they were scrupulously civil, and not a little
formal. He was an elder of the kirk, and, of course, zealous for King
George and the Government even to slaying, as he had showed by taking
up arms in their cause. But then, as he had clients and connexions
of business among families of opposite political tenets, he was
particularly cautious to use all the conventional phrases which the
civility of the time had devised, as an admissible mode of language
betwixt the two parties. Thus he spoke sometimes of the Chevalier, but
never either of the Prince, which would have been sacrificing his own
principles, or of the Pretender, which would have been offensive to
those of others. Again, he usually designated the Rebellion as the
AFFAIR of 1745, and spoke of any one engaged in it as a person who had
been OUT at a certain period. [OLD-FASHIONED SCOTTISH CIVILITY.--Such
were literally the points of politeness observed in general society
during the author’s youth, where it was by no means unusual in a company
assembled by chance, to find individuals who had borne arms on one
side or other in the civil broils of 1745. Nothing, according to my
recollection, could be more gentle and decorous than the respect
these old enemies paid to each other’s prejudices. But in this I speak
generally. I have witnessed one or two explosions.] So that, on the
whole, Mr. Fairford was a man much liked and respected on all sides,
though his friends would not have been sorry if he had given a dinner
more frequently, as his little cellar contained some choice old wine, of
which, on such rare occasions he was no niggard.

The whole pleasure of this good old-fashioned man of method, besides
that which he really felt in the discharge of his daily business, was
the hope to see his son Alan, the only fruit of a union which death
early dissolved, attain what in the father’s eyes was the proudest of
all distinctions--the rank and fame of a well-employed lawyer.

Every profession has its peculiar honours, and Mr. Fairford’s mind was
constructed upon so limited and exclusive a plan, that he valued nothing
save the objects of ambition which his own presented. He would have
shuddered at Alan’s acquiring the renown of a hero, and laughed with
scorn at the equally barren laurels of literature; it was by the path of
the law alone that he was desirous to see him rise to eminence, and
the probabilities of success or disappointment were the thoughts of his
father by day, and his dream by night.

The disposition of Alan Fairford, as well as his talents, were such as
to encourage his father’s expectations. He had acuteness of intellect,
joined to habits of long and patient study, improved no doubt by the
discipline of his father’s house; to which, generally speaking, he
conformed with the utmost docility, expressing no wish for greater or
more frequent relaxation than consisted with his father’s anxious and
severe restrictions. When he did indulge in any juvenile frolics, his
father had the candour to lay the whole blame upon his more mercurial
companion, Darsie Latimer.

This youth, as the reader must be aware, had been received as an inmate
into the family of Mr. Fairford, senior, at a time when some of the
delicacy of constitution which had abridged the life of his consort
began to show itself in the son, and when the father was, of course,
peculiarly disposed to indulge his slightest wish. That the young
Englishman was able to pay a considerable board, was a matter of no
importance to Mr. Fairford; it was enough that his presence seemed to
make his son cheerful and happy. He was compelled to allow that ‘Darsie
was a fine lad, though unsettled,’ and he would have had some difficulty
in getting rid of him, and the apprehensions which his levities excited,
had it not been for the voluntary excursion which gave rise to the
preceding correspondence, and in which Mr. Fairford secretly rejoiced,
as affording the means of separating Alan from his gay companion, at
least until he should have assumed, and become accustomed to, the duties
of his dry and laborious profession.

But the absence of Darsie was far from promoting the end which the elder
Mr. Fairford had expected and desired. The young men were united by the
closest bonds of intimacy; and the more so, that neither of them sought
nor desired to admit any others into their society. Alan Fairford was
averse to general company, from a disposition naturally reserved,
and Darsie Latimer from a painful sense of his own unknown origin,
peculiarly afflicting in a country where high and low are professed
genealogists. The young men were all in all to each other; it is no
wonder, therefore, that their separation was painful, and that its
effects upon Alan Fairford, joined to the anxiety occasioned by the
tenor of his friend’s letters, greatly exceeded what the senior had
anticipated. The young man went through his usual duties, his studies,
and the examinations to which he was subjected, but with nothing like
the zeal and assiduity which he had formerly displayed; and his anxious
and observant father saw but too plainly that his heart was with his
absent comrade.

A philosopher would have given way to this tide of feeling, in hopes to
have diminished its excess, and permitted the youths to have been
some time together, that their intimacy might have been broken off by
degrees; but Mr. Fairford only saw the more direct mode of continued
restraint, which, however, he was desirous of veiling under some
plausible pretext. In the anxiety which he felt on this occasion, he had
held communication with an old acquaintance, Peter Drudgeit, with whom
the reader is partly acquainted. ‘Alan,’ he said, ‘was ance wud, and
ay waur; and he was expecting every moment when he would start off in a
wildgoose-chase after the callant Latimer; Will Sampson, the horse-hirer
in Candlemaker Row, had given him a hint that Alan had been looking for
a good hack, to go to the country for a few days. And then to oppose
him downright--he could not but think on the way his poor mother was
removed. Would to Heaven he was yoked to some tight piece of business,
no matter whether well or ill paid, but some job that would hamshackle
him at least until the courts rose, if it were but for decency’s sake.’

Peter Drudgeit sympathized, for Peter had a son, who, reason or none,
would needs exchange the torn and inky fustian sleeves for the blue
jacket and white lapelle; and he suggested, as the reader knows, the
engaging our friend Alan in the matter of Poor Peter Peebles, just
opened by the desertion of young Dumtoustie, whose defection would be at
the same time concealed; and this, Drudgeit said, ‘would be felling two
dogs with one stone.’

With these explanations, the reader will hold a man of the elder
Fairford’s sense and experience free from the hazardous and impatient
curiosity with which boys fling a puppy into a deep pond, merely to see
if the creature can swim. However confident in his son’s talents, which
were really considerable, he would have been very sorry to have involved
him in the duty of pleading a complicated and difficult case, upon
his very first appearance at the bar, had he not resorted to it as an
effectual way to prevent the young man from taking a step which his
habits of thinking represented as a most fatal one at his outset of
life.

Betwixt two evils, Mr. Fairford chose that which was in his own
apprehension the least; and, like a brave officer sending forth his son
to battle, rather chose he should die upon the breach, than desert the
conflict with dishonour. Neither did he leave him to his own unassisted
energies. Like Alpheus preceding Hercules, he himself encountered the
Augean mass of Peter Peebles’ law-matters. It was to the old man a
labour of love to place in a clear and undistorted view the real merits
of this case, which the carelessness and blunders of Peter’s former
solicitors had converted into a huge chaotic mass of unintelligible
technicality; and such was his skill and industry, that he was
able, after the severe toil of two or three days, to present to the
consideration of the young counsel the principal facts of the case, in
a light equally simple and comprehensible. With the assistance of a
solicitor so affectionate and indefatigable, Alan Fairford was enabled,
then the day of trial arrived, to walk towards the court, attended by
his anxious yet encouraging parent, with some degree of confidence that
he would lose no reputation upon this arduous occasion.

They were met at the door of the court by Poor Peter Peebles in his
usual plenitude of wig and celsitude of hat. He seized on the young
pleader like a lion on his prey. ‘How is a’ wi’ you, Mr. Alan--how is
a’ wi’ you, man? The awfu’ day is come at last--a day that will be lang
minded in this house. Poor Peter Peebles against Plainstanes--conjoined
proceases--Hearing in presence--stands for the Short Roll for this
day--I have not been able to sleep for a week for thinking of it, and, I
dare to say, neither has the Lord President himsell--for such a cause!!
But your father garr’d me tak a wee drap ower muckle of his pint bottle
the other night; it’s no right to mix brandy wi’ business, Mr. Fairford.
I would have been the waur o’ liquor if I would have drank as muckle as
you twa would have had me. But there’s a time for a’ things, and if
ye will dine with me after the case is heard, or whilk is the same, or
maybe better, I’LL gang my ways hame wi’ YOU, and I winna object to a
cheerfu’ glass, within the bounds of moderation.’

Old Fairford shrugged his shoulders and hurried past the client, saw
his son wrapped in the sable bombazine, which, in his eyes, was more
venerable than an archbishop’s lawn, and could not help fondly patting
his shoulder, and whispering to him to take courage, and show he was
worthy to wear it. The party entered the Outer Hall of the court, (once
the place of meeting of the ancient Scottish Parliament), and which
corresponds to the use of Westminster Hall in England, serving as a
vestibule to the Inner House, as it is termed, and a place of dominion
to certain sedentary personages called Lords Ordinary.

The earlier part of the morning was spent by old Fairford in reiterating
his instructions to Alan, and in running from one person to another,
from whom he thought he could still glean some grains of information,
either concerning the point at issue, or collateral cases. Meantime,
Poor Peter Peebles, whose shallow brain was altogether unable to bear
the importance of the moment, kept as close to his young counsel as
shadow to substance, affected now to speak loud, now to whisper in his
ear, now to deck his ghastly countenance with wreathed smiles, now to
cloud it with a shade of deep and solemn importance, and anon to contort
it with the sneer of scorn and derision. These moods of the client’s
mind were accompanied with singular ‘mockings and mowings,’ fantastic
gestures, which the man of rags and litigation deemed appropriate to his
changes of countenance. Now he brandished his arm aloft, now thrust his
fist straight out, as if to knock his opponent down. Now he laid his
open palm on his bosom, and now hinging it abroad, he gallantly snapped
his fingers in the air.

These demonstrations, and the obvious shame and embarrassment of Alan
Fairford, did not escape the observation of the juvenile idlers in the
hall. They did not, indeed, approach Peter with their usual familiarity,
from some feeling of deference towards Fairford, though many accused
him of conceit in presuming to undertake, at this early stage of his
practice, a case of considerable difficulty. But Alan, notwithstanding
this forbearance, was not the less sensible that he and his companion
were the subjects of many a passing jest, and many a shout of laughter,
with which that region at all times abounds.

At length the young counsel’s patience gave way, and as it threatened to
carry his presence of mind and recollection along with it, Alan frankly
told his father, that unless he was relieved from the infliction of his
client’s personal presence and instructions, he must necessarily throw
up his brief, and decline pleading the case.

‘Hush, hush, my dear Alan,’ said the old gentleman, almost at his
own wit’s end upon hearing this dilemma; ‘dinna mind the silly
ne’er-do-weel; we cannot keep the man from hearing his own cause, though
he be not quite right in the head.’

‘On my life, sir,’ answered Alan, ‘I shall be unable to go on, he drives
everything out of my remembrance; and if I attempt to speak seriously of
the injuries he has sustained, and the condition he is reduced to, how
can I expect but that the very appearance of such an absurd scarecrow
will turn it all into ridicule?’

‘There is something in that,’ said Saunders Fairford, glancing a look
at Poor Peter, and then cautiously inserting his forefinger under his
bob-wig, in order to rub his temple and aid his invention; ‘he is no
figure for the fore-bar to see without laughing; but how to get rid
of him? To speak sense, or anything like it, is the last thing he will
listen to. Stay, aye,--Alan, my darling, hae patience; I’ll get him off
on the instant, like a gowff ba’.’

So saying, he hastened to his ally, Peter Drudgeit, who on seeing him
with marks of haste in his gait, and care upon his countenance, clapped
his pen behind his ear, with ‘What’s the stir now, Mr. Saunders? Is
there aught wrang?’

‘Here’s a dollar, man,’ said Mr. Saunders; ‘now, or never, Peter, do me
a good turn. Yonder’s your namesake, Peter Peebles, will drive the swine
through our bonny hanks of yarn; get him over to John’s Coffeehouse,
man--gie him his meridian--keep him there, drunk or sober, till the
hearing is ower.’ [The simile is obvious, from the old manufacture of
Scotland, when the gudewife’s thrift, as the yarn wrought in the winter
was called, when laid down to bleach by the burn-side, was peculiarly
exposed to the inroads of pigs, seldom well regulated about a Scottish
farm-house.]

‘Eneugh said,’ quoth Peter Drudgeit, no way displeased with his own
share in the service required, ‘We’se do your bidding.’

Accordingly, the scribe was presently seen whispering in the ear of
Peter Peebles, whose response came forth in the following broken form:--

‘Leave the court for ae minute on this great day of judgement? not I, by
the Reg--Eh! what? Brandy, did ye say--French brandy?--couldna ye fetch
a stoup to the bar under your coat, man? Impossible? Nay, if it’s clean
impossible, and if we have an hour good till they get through the single
bill and the summar-roll, I carena if I cross the close wi’ you; I am
sure I need something to keep my heart up this awful day; but I’ll no
stay above an instant--not above a minute of time--nor drink aboon a
single gill,’

In a few minutes afterwards, the two Peters were seen moving through the
Parliament Close (which new-fangled affectation has termed a Square),
the triumphant Drudgeit leading captive the passive Peebles, whose legs
conducted him towards the dramshop, while his reverted eyes were
fixed upon the court. They dived into the Cimmerian abysses of John’s
Coffeehouse, [See Note 5.] formerly the favourite rendezvous of the
classical and genial Doctor Pitcairn, and were for the present seen no
more.

Relieved from his tormentor, Alan Fairford had time to rally his
recollections, which, in the irritation of his spirits, had nearly
escaped him, and to prepare himself far a task, the successful discharge
or failure in which must, he was aware, have the deepest influence upon
his fortunes. He had pride, was not without a consciousness of talent,
and the sense of his father’s feelings upon the subject impelled him to
the utmost exertion. Above all, he had that sort of self-command
which is essential to success in every arduous undertaking, and he was
constitutionally free from that feverish irritability by which
those whose over-active imaginations exaggerate difficulties, render
themselves incapable of encountering such when they arrive.

Having collected all the scattered and broken associations which were
necessary, Alan’s thoughts reverted to Dumfriesshire, and the precarious
situation in which he feared his beloved friend had placed himself; and
once and again he consulted his watch, eager to have his present task
commenced and ended, that he might hasten to Darsie’s assistance. The
hour and moment at length arrived. The macer shouted, with all his
well-remembered brazen strength of lungs, ‘Poor Peter Peebles VERSUS
Plainstanes, PER Dumtoustie ET Tough!--Maister Da-a-niel Dumtoustie!’
Dumtoustie answered not the summons, which, deep and swelling as it was,
could not reach across the Queensferry; but our Maister Alan Fairford
appeared in his place.

The court was very much crowded; for much amusement had been received
on former occasions when Peter had volunteered his own oratory, and
had been completely successful in routing the gravity of the whole
procedure, and putting to silence, not indeed the counsel of the
opposite party, but his own.

Both bench and audience seemed considerably surprised at the juvenile
appearance of the young man who appeared in the room of Dumtoustie, for
the purpose of opening this complicated and long depending process, and
the common herd were disappointed at the absence of Peter the client,
the Punchinello of the expected entertainment. The judges looked with
a very favourable countenance on our friend Alan, most of them being
acquainted, more or less, with so old a practitioner as his father, and
all, or almost all, affording, from civility, the same fair play to the
first pleading of a counsel, which the House of Commons yields to the
maiden speech of one of its members.

Lord Bladderskate was an exception to this general expression of
benevolence. He scowled upon Alan, from beneath his large, shaggy, grey
eyebrows, just as if the young lawyer had been usurping his nephew’s
honours, instead of covering his disgrace; and, from feelings which did
his lordship little honour, he privately hoped the young man would not
succeed in the cause which his kinsman had abandoned.

Even Lord Bladderskate, however, was, in spite of himself, pleased with
the judicious and modest tone in which Alan began his address to the
court, apologizing for his own presumption, and excusing it by the
sudden illness of his learned brother, for whom the labour of opening
a cause of some difficulty and importance had been much more worthily
designed. He spoke of himself as he really was, and of young Dumtoustie
as what he ought to have been, taking care not to dwell on either topic
a moment longer than was necessary. The old judge’s looks became benign;
his family pride was propitiated, and, pleased equally with the modesty
and civility of the young man whom he had thought forward and officious,
he relaxed the scorn of his features into an expression of profound
attention; the highest compliment, and the greatest encouragement, which
a judge can render to the counsel addressing him.

Having succeeded in securing the favourable attention of the court,
the young lawyer, using the lights which his father’s experience and
knowledge of business had afforded him, proceeded with an address and
clearness, unexpected from one of his years, to remove from the case
itself those complicated formalities with which it had been loaded, as a
surgeon strips from a wound the dressings which had been hastily wrapped
round it, in order to proceed to his cure SECUNDUM ARTEM. Developed of
the cumbrous and complicated technicalities of litigation, with which
the perverse obstinacy of the client, the inconsiderate haste or
ignorance of his agents, and the evasions of a subtle adversary, had
invested the process, the cause of Poor Peter Peebles, standing upon
its simple merits, was no bad subject for the declamation of a young
counsel, nor did our friend Alan fail to avail himself of its strong
points.

He exhibited his client as a simple-hearted, honest, well-meaning
man, who, during a copartnership of twelve years, had gradually become
impoverished, while his partner (his former clerk) having no funds but
his share of the same business, into which he had been admitted without
any advance of stock, had become gradually more and more wealthy.

‘Their association,’ said Alan, and the little flight was received
with some applause, ‘resembled the ancient story of the fruit which was
carved with a knife poisoned on one side of the blade only, so that
the individual to whom the envenomed portion was served, drew decay and
death from what afforded savour and sustenance to the consumer of the
other moiety.’ He then plunged boldly into the MARE MAGNUM of accompts
between the parties; he pursued each false statement from the waste-book
to the day-book, from the day-book to the bill-book, from the bill-book
to the ledger; placed the artful interpolations and insertions of the
fallacious Plainstanes in array against each other, and against the
fact; and availing himself to the utmost of his father’s previous
labours, and his own knowledge of accompts, in which he had been
sedulously trained, he laid before the court a clear and intelligible
statement of the affairs of the copartnery, showing, with precision,
that a large balance must, at the dissolution, have been due to his
client, sufficient to have enabled him to have carried on business on
his own account, and thus to have retained his situation in society as
an independent and industrious tradesman. ‘But instead of this justice
being voluntarily rendered by the former clerk to his former master,--by
the party obliged to his benefactor,--by one honest man to another,--his
wretched client had been compelled to follow his quondam clerk, his
present debtor, from court to court; had found his just claims met with
well-invented but unfounded counter-claims, had seen his party shift
his character of pursuer or defender, as often as Harlequin effects his
transformations, till, in a chase so varied and so long, the unhappy
litigant had lost substance, reputation, and almost the use of reason
itself, and came before their lordships an object of thoughtless
derision to the unreflecting, of compassion to the better-hearted, and
of awful meditation to every one who considered that, in a country where
excellent laws were administered by upright and incorruptible judges, a
man might pursue an almost indisputable claim through all the mazes of
litigation; lose fortune, reputation, and reason itself in the chase,
and now come before the supreme court of his country in the wretched
condition of his unhappy client, a victim to protracted justice, and to
that hope delayed which sickens the heart.’

The force of this appeal to feeling made as much impression on the Bench
as had been previously effected by the clearness of Alan’s argument.
The absurd form of Peter himself, with his tow-wig, was fortunately not
present to excite any ludicrous emotion, and the pause that took place
when the young lawyer had concluded his speech, was followed by a murmur
of approbation, which the ears of his father drank in as the sweetest
sounds that had ever entered them. Many a hand of gratulation was thrust
out to his grasp, trembling as it was with anxiety, and finally with
delight; his voice faltering as he replied, ‘Aye, aye, I kend Alan was
the lad to make a spoon or spoil a horn.’ [Said of an adventurous gipsy,
who resolves at all risks to convert a sheep’s horn into a spoon.]

The counsel on the other side arose, an old practitioner, who had noted
too closely the impression made by Alan’s pleading not to fear the
consequences of an immediate decision. He paid the highest compliments
to his very young brother--‘the Benjamin, as he would presume to call
him, of the learned Faculty--said the alleged hardships of Mr.
Peebles were compensated by his being placed in a situation where
the benevolence of their lordships had assigned him gratuitously such
assistance as he might not otherwise have obtained at a high price--and
allowed his young brother had put many things in such a new point of
view, that, although he was quite certain of his ability to refute them,
he was honestly desirous of having a few hours to arrange his answer,
in order to be able to follow Mr. Fairford from point to point. He
had further to observe, there was one point of the case to which
his brother, whose attention had been otherwise so wonderfully
comprehensive, had not given the consideration which he expected; it was
founded on the interpretation of certain correspondence which had passed
betwixt the parties soon after the dissolution of the copartnery.’

The court having heard Mr. Tough, readily allowed him two days for
preparing himself, hinting at the same time that he might find his task
difficult, and affording the young counsel, with high encomiums upon the
mode in which he had acquitted himself, the choice of speaking,
either now or at the next calling of the cause, upon the point which
Plainstanes’s lawyer had adverted to.

Alan modestly apologized for what in fact had been an omission very
pardonable in so complicated a case, and professed himself instantly
ready to go through that correspondence, and prove that it was in
form and substance exactly applicable to the view of the case he had
submitted to their lordships. He applied to his father, who sat behind
him, to hand him, from time to time, the letters, in the order in which
he meant to read and comment upon them.

Old Counsellor Tough had probably formed an ingenious enough scheme to
blunt the effect of the young lawyer’s reasoning, by thus obliging him
to follow up a process of reasoning, clear and complete in itself, by
a hasty and extemporary appendix. If so, he seemed likely to be
disappointed; for Alan was well prepared on this as on other parts of
the cause, and recommenced his pleading with a degree of animation which
added force even to what he had formerly stated, and might perhaps have
occasioned the old gentleman to regret his having again called him up,
when his father, as he handed him the letters, put one into his hand
which produced a singular effect on the pleader.

At the first glance, he saw that the paper had no reference to the
affairs of Peter Peebles; but the first glance also showed him, what,
even at that time, and in that presence, he could not help reading; and
which, being read, seemed totally to disconcert his ideas. He stopped
short in his harangue--gazed on the paper with a look of surprise and
horror-uttered an exclamation, and flinging down the brief which he had
in his hand, hurried out of court without returning a single word of
answer to the various questions, ‘What was the matter?’--‘Was he taken
unwell?’--‘Should not a chair be called?’ &c. &c. &c.

The elder Mr. Fairford, who remained seated, and looking as senseless as
if he had been made of stone, was at length recalled to himself by the
anxious inquiries of the judges and the counsel after his son’s health.
He then rose with an air, in which was mingled the deep habitual
reverence in which he held the court, with some internal cause of
agitation, and with difficulty mentioned something of a mistake--a piece
of bad news--Alan, he hoped would be well enough to-morrow. But unable
to proceed further, he clasped his hands together, exclaiming, ‘My son!
my son!’ and left the court hastily, as if in pursuit of him.

‘What’s the matter with the auld bitch next?’ [Tradition ascribes this
whimsical style of language to the ingenious and philosophical Lord
Kaimes.] said an acute metaphysical judge, though somewhat coarse in
his manners, aside to his brethren. ‘This is a daft cause,
Bladderskate--first, it drives the poor man mad that aught it--then your
nevoy goes daft with fright, and flies the pit--then this smart young
hopeful is aff the hooks with too hard study, I fancy--and now auld
Saunders Fairford is as lunatic as the best of them. What say ye till’t,
ye bitch?’

‘Nothing, my lord,’ answered Bladderskate, much too formal to admire the
levities in which his philosophical brother sometimes indulged--‘I say
nothing, but pray to Heaven to keep our own wits.’

‘Amen, amen,’ answered his learned brother; ‘for some of us have but few
to spare.’

The court then arose, and the audience departed, greatly wondering at
the talent displayed by Alan Fairford at his first appearance in a case
so difficult and so complicated, and assigning a hundred conjectural
causes, each different from the others, for the singular interruption
which had clouded his day of success. The worst of the whole was, that
six agents, who had each come to the separate resolution of thrusting a
retaining fee into Alan’s hand as he left the court, shook their heads
as they returned the money into their leathern pouches, and said, ‘that
the lad was clever, but they would like to see more of him before they
engaged him in the way of business--they did not like his lowping away
like a flea in a blanket.’





Had our friend Alexander Fairford known the consequences of his son’s
abrupt retreat from the court, which are mentioned in the end of the
last chapter, it might have accomplished the prediction of the lively
old judge, and driven him utterly distracted. As it was, he was
miserable enough. His son had risen ten degrees higher in his estimation
than ever by his display of juridical talents, which seemed to assure
him that the applause of the judges and professors of the law, which, in
his estimation, was worth that of all mankind besides, authorized to
the fullest extent the advantageous estimate which even his parental
partiality had been induced to form of Alan’s powers. On the other hand,
he felt that he was himself a little humbled, from a disguise which he
had practised towards this son of his hopes and wishes.

The truth was, that on the morning of this eventful day, Mr. Alexander
Fairford had received from his correspondent and friend, Provost Crosbie
of Dumfries, a letter of the following tenor:

‘DEAR SIR, ‘Your respected favour of 25th ultimo, per favour of
Mr. Darsie Latimer, reached me in safety, and I showed to the young
gentleman such attention as he was pleased to accept of. The object of
my present writing is twofold. First, the council are of opinion that
you should now begin to stir in the thirlage cause; and they think they
will be able, from evidence NOVITER REPERTUM, to enable you to amend
your condescendence upon the use and wont of the burgh, touching
the GRANA INVECTA ET ILLATA. So you will please consider yourself as
authorized to speak to Mr. Pest, and lay before him the papers which you
will receive by the coach. The council think that a fee of two guineas
may be sufficient on this occasion, as Mr. Pest had three for drawing
the original condescendence.

‘I take the opportunity of adding that there has been a great riot among
the Solway fishermen, who have destroyed, in a masterful manner,
the stake-nets set up near the mouth of this river; and have besides
attacked the house of Quaker Geddes, one of the principal partners of
the Tide-net Fishing Company, and done a great deal of damage. Am sorry
to add, young Mr. Latimer was in the fray and has not since been heard
of. Murder is spoke of, but that may be a word of course. As the young
gentleman has behaved rather oddly while in these parts, as in declining
to dine with me more than once, and going about the country with
strolling fiddlers and such-like, I rather hope that his present absence
is only occasioned by a frolic; but as his servant has been making
inquiries of me respecting his master, I thought it best to acquaint
you in course of post. I have only to add that our sheriff has taken
a precognition, and committed one or two of the rioters. If I can be
useful in this matter, either by advertising for Mr. Latimer as
missing, publishing a reward, or otherwise, I will obey your respected
instructions, being your most obedient to command, ‘WILLIAM CROSBIE.’

When Mr. Fairford received this letter, and had read it to an end,’ his
first idea was to communicate it to his son, that an express might be
instantly dispatched, or a king’s messenger sent with proper authority
to search after his late guest.

The habits of the fishers were rude; as he well knew, though not
absolutely sanguinary or ferocious; and there had been instances of
their transporting persons who had interfered in their smuggling trade
to the Isle of Man and elsewhere, and keeping them under restraint for
many weeks. On this account, Mr. Fairford was naturally led to
feel anxiety concerning the fate of his late inmate; and, at a less
interesting moment, would certainly have set out himself, or licensed
his son to go in pursuit of his friend.

But, alas! he was both a father and an agent. In the one capacity, he
looked on his son as dearer to him than all the world besides; in the
other, the lawsuit which he conducted was to him like an infant to its
nurse, and the case of Poor Peter Peebles against Plainstanes was, he
saw, adjourned, perhaps SINE DIE, should this document reach the hands
of his son. The mutual and enthusiastical affection betwixt the young
men was well known to him; and he concluded that if the precarious state
of Latimer were made known to Alan Fairford, it would render him not
only unwilling, but totally unfit, to discharge the duty of the day to
which the old gentleman attached such ideas of importance.

On mature reflection, therefore, he resolved, though not without
some feelings of compunction, to delay communicating to his son the
disagreeable intelligence which he had received, until the business of
the day should be ended. The delay, he persuaded himself, could be of
little consequence to Darsie Latimer, whose folly, he dared to say, had
led him into some scrape which would meet an appropriate punishment in
some accidental restraint, which would be thus prolonged for only a few
hours longer. Besides, he would have time to speak to the sheriff of the
county--perhaps to the King’s Advocate--and set about the matter in
a regular manner, or, as he termed it, as summing up the duties of
a solicitor, to AGE AS ACCORDS. [A Scots law phrase, of no very
determinate import, meaning, generally, to do what is fitting.]

The scheme, as we have seen, was partially successful, and was only
ultimately defeated, as he confessed to himself with shame, by his own
very unbusiness-like mistake of shuffling the provost’s letter, in the
hurry and anxiety of the morning, among some papers belonging to Peter
Peebles’s affairs, and then handing it to his son, without observing
the blunder. He used to protest, even till the day of his death, that he
never had been guilty of such an inaccuracy as giving a paper out of his
hand without looking at the docketing, except on that unhappy occasion,
when, of all others, he had such particular reason to regret his
negligence.

Disturbed by these reflections, the old gentleman had, for the first
time in his life, some disinclination, arising from shame and vexation,
to face his own son; so that to protract for a little the meeting,
which he feared would be a painful one, he went to wait upon the
sheriff-depute, who he found had set off for Dumfries in great haste to
superintend in person the investigation which had been set on foot by
his substitute. This gentleman’s clerk could say little on the subject
of the riot, excepting that it had been serious, much damage done to
property, and some personal violence offered to individuals; but, as far
as he had yet heard, no lives lost on the spot.

Mr. Fairford was compelled to return home with this intelligence; and
on inquiring at James Wilkinson where his son was, received for answer,
that ‘Maister Alan was in his own room, and very busy.’

‘We must have our explanation over,’ said Saunders Fairford to himself.
‘Better a finger off, as ay wagging;’ and going to the door of his son’s
apartment, he knocked at first gently--then more loudly--but received
no answer. Somewhat alarmed at this silence, he opened the door of the
chamber it was empty--clothes lay mixed in confusion with the law-books
and papers, as if the inmate had been engaged in hastily packing for a
journey. As Mr. Fairford looked around in alarm, his eye was arrested
by a sealed letter lying upon his son’s writing-table, and addressed to
himself. It contained the following words:--

‘MY DEAREST FATHER, ‘You will not, I trust, be surprised, nor perhaps
very much displeased, to learn that I am on my way to Dumfriesshire, to
learn, by my own personal investigation, the present state of my dear
friend, and afford him such relief as may be in my power, and which, I
trust, will be effectual. I do not presume to reflect upon you, dearest
sir, for concealing from me information of so much consequence to my
peace of mind and happiness; but I hope your having done so will be, if
not an excuse, at least some mitigation of my present offence, in taking
a step of consequence without consulting your pleasure; and, I must
further own, under circumstances which perhaps might lead to your
disapprobation of my purpose. I can only say, in further apology, that
if anything unhappy, which Heaven forbid! shall have occurred to the
person who, next to yourself, is dearest to me in this world, I shall
have on my heart, as a subject of eternal regret, that being in a
certain degree warned of his danger and furnished with the means
of obviating it, I did not instantly hasten to his assistance, but
preferred giving my attention to the business of this unlucky morning.
No view of personal distinction, nothing, indeed, short of your earnest
and often expressed wishes, could have detained me in town till this
day; and having made this sacrifice to filial duty, I trust you will
hold me excused if I now obey the calls of friendship and humanity. Do
not be in the least anxious on my account; I shall know, I trust, how
to conduct myself with due caution in any emergence which may occur,
otherwise my legal studies for so many years have been to little
purpose. I am fully provided with money, and also with arms, in case of
need; but you may rely on my prudence in avoiding all occasions of using
the latter, short of the last necessity. God almighty bless you, my
dearest father! and grant that you may forgive the first, and, I trust,
the last act approaching towards premeditated disobedience, of which I
either have now, or shall hereafter have, to accuse myself. I remain,
till death, your dutiful and affectionate son, ALAN FAIRFORD.’

‘PS.--I shall write with the utmost regularity, acquainting you with my
motions, and requesting your advice. I trust my stay will be very short,
and I think it possible that I may bring back Darsie along with me.’

‘The paper dropped from the old man’s hand when he was thus assured
of the misfortune which he apprehended. His first idea was to get a
postchaise and pursue the fugitive; but he recollected that, upon the
very rare occasions when Alan had shown himself indocile to the PATRIA
POTESTAS, his natural ease and gentleness of disposition seemed hardened
into obstinacy, and that now, entitled, as arrived at the years of
majority and a member of the learned faculty, to direct his own motions,
there was great doubt, whether, in the event of his overtaking his son,
he might be able to prevail upon him to return back. In such a risk of
failure he thought it wiser to desist from his purpose, especially as
even his success in such a pursuit would give a ridiculous ECLAT to the
whole affair, which could not be otherwise than prejudicial to his son’s
rising character.

Bitter, however, were Saunders Fairford’s reflections, as again
picking up the fatal scroll, he threw himself into his son’s leathern
easy-chair, and bestowed upon it a disjointed commentary, ‘Bring back
Darsie? little doubt of that--the bad shilling is sure enough to come
back again. I wish Darsie no worse ill than that he were carried where
the silly fool, Alan, should never see him again. It was an ill hour
that he darkened my doors in, for, ever since that, Alan has given up
his ain old-fashioned mother-wit for the tother’s capernoited maggots
and nonsense. Provided with money? you must have more than I know of,
then, my friend, for I trow I kept you pretty short, for your own good.
Can he have gotten more fees? or, does he think five guineas has neither
beginning nor end? Arms! What would he do with arms, or what would any
man do with them that is not a regular soldier under government, or else
a thief-taker? I have had enough of arms, I trow, although I carried
them for King George and the government. But this is a worse strait than
Falkirk field yet. God guide us, we are poor inconsistent creatures! To
think the lad should have made so able an appearance, and then bolted
off this gate, after a glaiket ne’er-do-weel, like a hound upon a false
scent! Las-a-day! it’s a sore thing to see a stunkard cow kick down
the pail when it’s reaming fou. But, after all, it’s an ill bird that
defiles its ain nest. I must cover up the scandal as well as I can.
What’s the matter now, James?’

‘A message, sir,’ said James Wilkinson, ‘from my Lord President; and he
hopes Mr. Alan is not seriously indisposed.’

‘From the Lord President? the Lord preserve us!--I’ll send an answer
this instant; bid the lad sit down, and ask him to drink, James. Let me
see,’ continued he, taking a sheet of gilt paper ‘how we are to draw our
answers.’

Ere his pen had touched the paper, James was in the room again.

‘What now, James?’

‘Lord Bladderskate’s lad is come to ask how Mr. Alan is, as he left; the
court’--

‘Aye, aye, aye,’ answered Saunders, bitterly; ‘he has e’en made a
moonlight flitting, like my lord’s ain nevoy.’

‘Shall I say sae, sir?’ said James, who, as an old soldier, was literal
in all things touching the service.

‘The devil! no, no!--Bid the lad sit down and taste our ale. I will
write his lordship an answer.’

Once more the gilt paper was resumed, and once more the door was opened
by James.

‘Lord ------ sends his servitor to ask after Mr. Alan.’

‘Oh, the deevil take their civility!’ said poor Saunders, set him down
to drink too--I will write to his lordship.’

‘The lads will bide your pleasure, sir, as lang as I keep the bicker
fou; but this ringing is like to wear out the bell, I think; there are
they at it again.’

He answered the fresh summons accordingly, and came back to inform Mr.
Fairford that the Dean of Faculty was below, inquiring for Mr. Alan.
‘Will I set him down to drink, too?’ said James.

‘Will you be an idiot, sir?’ said Mr. Fairford. ‘Show Mr. Dean into the
parlour.’

In going slowly downstairs, step by step, the perplexed man of business
had time enough to reflect, that if it be possible to put a fair gloss
upon a true story, the verity always serves the purpose better than any
substitute which ingenuity can devise. He therefore told his learned
visitor, that although his son had been incommoded by the heat of the
court, and the long train of hard study, by day and night, preceding
his exertions, yet he had fortunately so far recovered, as to be in
condition to obey upon the instant a sudden summons which had called him
to the country, on a matter of life and death.

‘It should be a serious matter indeed that takes my young friend away
at this moment,’ said the good-natured dean. ‘I wish he had stayed to
finish his pleading, and put down old Tough. Without compliment, Mr.
Fairford, it was as fine a first appearance as I ever heard. I should
be sorry your son did not follow it up in a reply. Nothing like striking
while the iron is hot.’

Mr. Saunders Fairford made a bitter grimace as he acquiesced in an
opinion which was indeed decidedly his own; but he thought it most
prudent to reply, ‘that the affair which rendered his son Alan’s
presence in the country absolutely necessary, regarded the affairs of a
young gentleman of great fortune, who was a particular friend of Alan’s,
and who never took any material step in his affairs without consulting
his counsel learned in the law.’

‘Well, well, Mr. Fairford, you know best,’ answered the learned dean;
‘if there be death or marriage in the case, a will or a wedding is to
be preferred to all other business. I am happy Mr. Alan is so much
recovered as to be able for travel, and wish you a very good morning.’

Having thus taken his ground to the Dean of Faculty, Mr. Fairford
hastily wrote cards in answer to the inquiry of the three judges,
accounting for Alan’s absence in the same manner. These, being properly
sealed and addressed, he delivered to James with directions to dismiss
the particoloured gentry, who, in the meanwhile, had consumed a gallon
of twopenny ale, while discussing points of law, and addressing each
other by their masters’ titles. [The Scottish judges are distinguished
by the title of lord prefixed to their own temporal designation. As
the ladies of these official dignitaries do not bear any share in their
husbands’ honours, they are distinguished only by their lords’ family
name. They were not always contented with this species of Salique law,
which certainly is somewhat inconsistent. But their pretensions to title
are said to have been long since repelled by James V, the sovereign who
founded the College of Justice. ‘I,’ said he, ‘made the caries lords,
but who the devil made the carlines ladies?’]

The exertion which these matters demanded, and the interest which so
many persons of legal distinction appeared to have taken in his
son, greatly relieved the oppressed spirit of Saunders Fairford, who
continued, to talk mysteriously of the very important business which had
interfered with his son’s attendance during the brief remainder of the
session. He endeavoured to lay the same unction to his own heart; but
here the application was less fortunate, for his conscience told him
that no end, however important, which could be achieved in Darsie
Latimer’s affairs, could be balanced against the reputation which Alan
was like to forfeit by deserting the cause of Poor Peter Peebles.

In the meanwhile, although the haze which surrounded the cause, or
causes, of that unfortunate litigant had been for a time dispelled by
Alan’s eloquence, like a fog by the thunder of artillery, yet it seemed
once more to settle down upon the mass of litigation, thick as the
palpable darkness of Egypt, at the very sound of Mr. Tough’s voice, who,
on the second day after Alan’s departure, was heard in answer to the
opening counsel. Deep-mouthed, long-breathed, and pertinacious, taking
a pinch of snuff betwixt every sentence, which otherwise seemed
interminable--the veteran pleader prosed over all the themes which had
been treated so luminously by Fairford: he quietly and imperceptibly
replaced all the rubbish which the other had cleared away, and succeeded
in restoring the veil of obscurity and unintelligibility which had for
many years darkened the case of Peebles against Plainstanes; and
the matter was once more hung up by a remit to an accountant, with
instruction to report before answer. So different a result from that
which the public had been led to expect from Alan’s speech gave rise to
various speculations.

The client himself opined, that it was entirely owing, first, to his
own absence during the first day’s pleading, being, as he said,
deboshed with brandy, usquebaugh, and other strong waters, at John’s
Coffee-house, PER AMBAGES of Peter Drudgeit, employed to that effect by
and through the device, counsel, and covyne of Saunders Fairford,
his agent, or pretended agent. Secondly by the flight and voluntary
desertion of the younger Fairford, the advocate; on account of which, he
served both father and son with a petition and complaint against them,
for malversation in office. So that the apparent and most probable issue
of this cause seemed to menace the melancholy Mr. Saunders Fairford,
with additional subject for plague and mortification; which was the more
galling, as his conscience told him that the case was really given away,
and that a very brief resumption of the former argument, with reference
to the necessary authorities and points of evidence, would have enabled
Alan, by the mere breath, as it were, of his mouth, to blow away the
various cobwebs with which Mr. Tough had again invested the proceedings.
But it went, he said, just like a decreet in absence, and was lost for
want of a contradictor.

In the meanwhile, nearly a week passed over without Mr. Fairford hearing
a word directly from his son. He learned, indeed, by a letter from Mr.
Crosbie, that the young counsellor had safely reached Dumfries, but had
left that town upon some ulterior researches, the purpose of which
he had not communicated. The old man, thus left to suspense, and to
mortifying recollections, deprived also of the domestic society to which
he had been habituated, began to suffer in body as well as in mind. He
had formed the determination of setting out in person for Dumfriesshire,
when, after having been dogged, peevish, and snappish to his clerks and
domestics, to an unusual and almost intolerable degree, the acrimonious
humours settled in a hissing-hot fit of the gout, which is a well-known
tamer of the most froward spirits, and under whose discipline we shall,
for the present, leave him, as the continuation of this history assumes,
with the next division, a form somewhat different from direct narrative
and epistolary correspondence, though partaking of the character of
both.





JOURNAL OF DARSIE LATIMER (The following address is written on the
inside of the envelope which contained the Journal.)

Into what hands soever these leaves may fall, they will instruct
him, during a certain time at least, in the history of the life of an
unfortunate young man, who, in the heart of a free country, and without
any crime being laid to his charge, has been, and is, subjected to a
course of unlawful and violent restraint. He who opens this letter, is
therefore conjured to apply to the nearest magistrate, and, following
such indications as the papers may afford, to exert himself for the
relief of one, who, while he possesses every claim to assistance
which oppressed innocence can give, has, at the same time, both the
inclination and the means of being grateful to his deliverers. Or, if
the person obtaining these letters shall want courage or means to effect
the writer’s release, he is, in that case, conjured, by every duty of a
man to his fellow mortals, and of a Christian towards one who professes
the same holy faith, to take the speediest measures for conveying them
with speed and safety to the hands of Alan Fairford, Esq., Advocate,
residing in the family of his father, Alexander Fairford, Esq., Writer
to the Signet, Brown’s Square, Edinburgh. He may be assured of a liberal
reward, besides the consciousness of having discharged a real duty to
humanity.

MY DEAREST ALAN, Feeling as warmly towards you in doubt and in distress,
as I ever did in the brightest days of our intimacy, it is to you whom
I address a history which may perhaps fall into very different hands. A
portion of my former spirit descends to my pen when I write your name,
and indulging the happy thought that you may be my deliverer from my
present uncomfortable and alarming situation, as you have been my guide
and counsellor on every former occasion, I will subdue the dejection
which would otherwise overwhelm me. Therefore, as, Heaven knows, I have
time enough to write, I will endeavour to pour my thoughts out, as fully
and freely as of old, though probably without the same gay and happy
levity.

If the papers should reach other hands than yours, still I will not
regret this exposure of my feelings; for, allowing for an ample share of
the folly incidental to youth and inexperience, I fear not that I have
much to be ashamed of in my narrative; nay, I even hope that the open
simplicity and frankness with which I am about to relate every singular
and distressing circumstance, may prepossess even a stranger in my
favour; and that, amid the multitude of seemingly trivial circumstances
which I detail at length, a clue may be found to effect my liberation.

Another chance certainly remains--the Journal, as I may call it,
may never reach the hands, either of the dear friend to whom it is
addressed, or those of an indifferent stranger, but may become the prey
of the persons by whom I am at present treated as a prisoner. Let it be
so--they will learn from it little but what they already know; that,
as a man and an Englishman, my soul revolts at the usage which I have
received; that I am determined to essay every possible means to obtain
my freedom; that captivity has not broken my spirit, and that, although
they may doubtless complete their oppression by murder, I am still
willing to bequeath my cause to the justice of my country. Undeterred,
therefore, by the probability that my papers may be torn from me, and
subjected to the inspection of one in particular, who, causelessly
my enemy already, may be yet further incensed at me for recording the
history of my wrongs, I proceed to resume the history of events which
have befallen me since the conclusion of my last letter to my dear Alan
Fairford, dated, if I mistake not, on the 5th day of this still current
month of August.

Upon the night preceding the date of that letter, I had been present,
for the purpose of an idle frolic, at a dancing party at the village of
Brokenburn, about six miles from Dumfries; many persons must have seen
me there, should the fact appear of importance sufficient to require
investigation. I danced, played on the violin, and took part in the
festivity till about midnight, when my servant, Samuel Owen, brought me
my horses, and I rode back to a small inn called Shepherd’s Bush, kept
by Mrs. Gregson, which had been occasionally my residence for about a
fortnight past. I spent the earlier part of the forenoon in writing a
letter, which I have already mentioned, to you, my dear Alan, and which,
I think, you must have received in safety. Why did I not follow your
advice, so often given me? Why did I linger in the neighbourhood of a
danger, of which a kind voice had warned me? These are now unavailing
questions; I was blinded by a fatality, and remained, fluttering like a
moth around the candle, until I have been scorched to some purpose.

The greater part of the day had passed, and time hung heavy on my hands.
I ought, perhaps, to blush at recollecting what has been often objected
to me by the dear friend to whom this letter is addressed, viz. the
facility with which I have, in moments of indolence, suffered my motions
to be, directed by any person who chanced to be near me, instead of
taking the labour of thinking or deciding for myself. I had employed for
some time, as a sort of guide and errand-boy, a lad named Benjamin, the
son of one widow Coltherd, who lives near the Shepherd’s Bush, and I
cannot but remember that, upon several occasions, I had of late suffered
him to possess more influence over my motions than at all became the
difference of our age and condition. At present, he exerted himself to
persuade me that it was the finest possible sport to see the fish taken
out from the nets placed in the Solway at the reflux of the tide, and
urged my going thither this evening so much, that, looking back on the
whole circumstances, I cannot but think he had some especial motive for
his conduct. These particulars I have mentioned, that if these papers
fall into friendly hands, the boy may be sought after and submitted to
examination.

His eloquence being unable to persuade me that I should take any
pleasure in seeing the fruitless struggles of the fish when left in the
nets and deserted by the tide, he artfully suggested, that Mr. and Miss
Geddes, a respectable Quaker family well known in the neighbourhood
and with whom I had contracted habits of intimacy, would possibly be
offended if I did not make them an early visit. Both, he said, had been
particularly inquiring the reasons of my leaving their house rather
suddenly on the previous day. I resolved, therefore, to walk up to Mount
Sharon and make my apologies; and I agreed to permit the boy to attend
upon me, and wait my return from the house, that I might fish on my way
homeward to Shepherd’s Bush, for which amusement, he assured me, I would
find the evening most favourable. I mention this minute circumstance,
because I strongly suspect that this boy had a presentiment how the
evening was to terminate with me, and entertained the selfish though
childish wish of securing to himself an angling-rod which he had often
admired, as a part of my spoils. I may do the boy wrong, but I had
before remarked in him the peculiar art of pursuing the trifling objects
of cupidity proper to his age, with the systematic address of much riper
years.

When we had commenced our walk, I upbraided him with the coolness of
the evening, considering the season, the easterly wind, and other
circumstances, unfavourable for angling. He persisted in his own story,
and made a few casts, as if to convince me of my error, but caught
no fish; and, indeed, as I am now convinced, was much more intent on
watching my motions than on taking any. When I ridiculed him once more
on his fruitless endeavours, he answered with a sneering smile, that
‘the trouts would not rise, because there was thunder in the air;’ an
intimation which, in one sense, I have found too true.

I arrived at Mount Sharon; was received by my friends there with their
wonted kindness; and after being a little rallied on my having suddenly
left them on the preceding evening, I agreed to make atonement
by staying all night, and dismissed the lad who attended with my
fishing-rod, to carry that information to Shepherd’s Bush. It may be
doubted whether he went thither, or in a different direction.

Betwixt eight and nine o’clock, when it began to become dark, we walked
on the terrace to enjoy the appearance of the firmament, glittering with
ten million stars; to which a slight touch of early frost gave tenfold
lustre. As we gazed on this splendid scene, Miss Geddes, I think, was
the first to point out to our admiration a shooting or falling star,
which, she said, drew a long train after it. Looking to the part of
the heavens which she pointed out, I distinctly observed two successive
sky-rockets arise and burst in the sky.

‘These meteors,’ said Mr. Geddes, in answer to his sister’s observation,
‘are not formed in heaven, nor do they bode any good to the dwellers
upon earth.’

As he spoke, I looked to another quarter of the sky, and a rocket, as if
a signal in answer to those which had already appeared, rose high from
the earth, and burst apparently among the stars.

Mr. Geddes seemed very thoughtful for some minutes, and then said to
his sister, ‘Rachel, though it waxes late. I must go down to the fishing
station, and pass the night in the overseer’s room there.’

‘Nay, then,’ replied the lady, ‘I am but too well assured that the sons
of Belial are menacing these nets and devices. Joshua, art thou a man of
peace, and wilt thou willingly and wittingly thrust thyself where thou
mayst be tempted by the old man Adam within thee, to enter into debate
and strife?’

‘I am a man of peace, Rachel,’ answered Mr. Geddes, ‘even to the utmost
extent which our friends can demand of humanity; and neither have I ever
used, nor, with the help of God, will I at any future time employ, the
arm of flesh to repel or to revenge injuries. But if I can, by mild
reasons and firm conduct, save those rude men from committing a crime,
and the property belonging to myself and others from sustaining damage,
surely I do but the duty of a man and a Christian.’

With these words, he ordered his horse instantly; and his sister,
ceasing to argue with him, folded her arms upon her bosom, and looked up
to heaven with a resigned and yet sorrowful countenance.

These particulars may appear trivial; but it is better, in my present
condition, to exert my faculties in recollecting the past, and in
recording it, than waste them in vain and anxious anticipations of the
future.

It would have been scarcely proper in me to remain in the house from
which the master was thus suddenly summoned away; and I therefore begged
permission to attend him to the fishing station, assuring his sister
that I would be a guarantee for his safety.

That proposal seemed to give much pleasure to Miss Geddes. ‘Let it be
so, brother,’ she said; ‘and let the young man have the desire of his
heart, that there may be a faithful witness to stand by thee in the hour
of need, and to report how it shall fare with thee.

‘Nay, Rachel,’ said the worthy man, ‘thou art to blame in this, that
to quiet thy apprehensions on my account, thou shouldst thrust into
danger--if danger it shall prove to be--this youth, our guest; for
whom, doubtless, in case of mishap, as many hearts will ache as may be
afflicted on our account.’

‘No, my good friend,’ said I, taking Mr. Geddes’s hand, ‘I am not so
happy as you suppose me. Were my span to be concluded this evening, few
would so much as know that such a being had existed for twenty years on
the face of the earth; and of these few, only one would sincerely regret
me. Do not, therefore, refuse me the privilege attending you; and of
showing, by so trifling an act of kindness, that if I have few friends,
I am at least desirous to serve them.’

‘Thou hast a kind heart, I warrant thee,’ said Joshua Geddes, returning
the pressure of my hand. ‘Rachel, the young man shall go with me. Why
should he not face danger, in order to do justice and preserve peace?
There is that within me,’ he added, looking upwards, and with a passing
enthusiasm which I had not before observed and the absence of
which perhaps rather belonged to the sect than to his own personal
character--‘I say, I have that within which assures me, that though the
ungodly may rage even like the storm of the ocean, they shall not have
freedom to prevail against us.’

Having spoken thus, Mr. Geddes appointed a pony to be saddled for my
use; and having taken a basket with some provisions, and a servant
to carry back the horses for which there was no accommodation at the
fishing station, we set off about nine o’clock at night, and after
three-quarters of an hour’s riding, arrived at our place of destination.

The station consists, or then consisted, of huts for four or five
fishermen, a cooperage and shed, and a better sort of cottage at which
the superintendent resided. We gave our horses to the servant, to be
carried back to Mount Sharon; my companion expressing himself humanely
anxious for their safety--and knocked at the door of the house. At
first we only heard a barking of dogs; but these animals became quiet on
snuffing beneath the door, and acknowledging the presence of friends. A
hoarse voice then demanded, in rather unfriendly accents, who we were,
and what we wanted and it was not; until Joshua named himself, and
called upon his superintendent to open, that the latter appeared at the
door of the hut, attended by three large dogs of the Newfoundland breed.
He had a flambeau in his hand, and two large heavy ship-pistols stuck
into his belt. He was a stout elderly man, who had been a sailor, as I
learned, during the earlier part of his life, and was now much confided
in by the Fishing Company, whose concerns he directed under the orders
of Mr. Geddes.

‘Thou didst not expect me to-night, friend Davies?’ said my friend to
the old man, who was arranging seats for us by the fire.

‘No, Master Geddes,’ answered he, ‘I did not expect you, nor, to speak
the truth, did I wish for you either.’

‘These are plain terms: John Davies,’ answered Mr. Geddes.

‘Aye, aye, sir, I know your worship loves no holiday speeches.’

‘Thou dost guess, I suppose, what brings us here so late, John Davies?’
said Mr. Geddes.

‘I do suppose, sir,’ answered the superintendent, ‘that it was because
those d--d smuggling wreckers on the coast are showing their lights to
gather their forces, as they did the night before they broke down the
dam-dyke and weirs up the country; but if that same be the case, I wish
once more you had stayed away, for your worship carries no fighting
tackle aboard, I think; and there will be work for such ere morning,
your worship.’

‘Worship is due to Heaven only, John Davies,’ said Geddes, ‘I have often
desired thee to desist from using that phrase to me.’

‘I won’t, then,’ said John; ‘no offence meant: But how the devil can a
man stand picking his words, when he is just going to come to blows?’

‘I hope not, John Davies,’ said Joshua Geddes. ‘Call in the rest of the
men, that I may give them their instructions.’

‘I may cry till doomsday Master Geddes, ere a soul answers--the cowardly
lubbers have all made sail--the cooper, and all the rest of them, so
soon as they heard the enemy were at sea. They have all taken to the
long-boat, and left the ship among the breakers, except little Phil and
myself--they have, by--!’

‘Swear not at all, John Davies--thou art an honest man; and I believe,
without an oath, that thy comrades love their own bones better than
my goods and chattels. And so thou hast no assistance but little Phil
against a hundred men or two?’

‘Why, there are the dogs, your honour knows, Neptune and Thetis--and
the puppy may do something; and then though your worship--I beg
pardon--though your honour be no great fighter, this young gentleman may
bear a hand.’

‘Aye, and I see you are provided with arms,’ said Mr. Geddes; ‘let me
see them.’

‘Aye, aye, sir; here be a pair of buffers will bite as well as
bark--these will make sure of two rogues at least. It would be a shame
to strike without firing a shot. Take care, your honour, they are
double-shotted.’

‘Aye, John Davies, I will take care of them, throwing the pistols into a
tub of water beside him; ‘and I wish I could render the whole generation
of them useless at the same moment.’

A deep shade of displeasure passed over John Davies’s weatherbeaten
countenance. ‘Belike your honour is going to take the command yourself,
then?’ he said, after a pause. ‘Why, I can be of little use now; and
since your worship, or your honour, or whatever you are, means to strike
quietly, I believe you will do it better without me than with me, for I
am like enough to make mischief, I admit; but I’ll never leave my post
without orders.’

‘Then you have mine, John Davies, to go to Mount Sharon directly, and
take the boy Phil with you. Where is he?’

‘He is on the outlook for these scums of the earth,’ answered Davies;
‘but it is to no purpose to know when they come, if we are not to stand
to our weapons.’

‘We will use none but those of sense and reason, John.’

‘And you may just as well cast chaff against the wind, as speak sense
and reason to the like of them.’

‘Well, well, be it so,’ said Joshua; ‘and now, John Davies, I know thou
art what the world calls a brave fellow, and I have ever found thee an
honest one. And now I command you to go to Mount Sharon, and let Phil
lie on the bank-side--see the poor boy hath a sea-cloak, though--and
watch what happens there, and let him bring you the news; and if
any violence shall be offered to the property there, I trust to your
fidelity to carry my sister to Dumfries to the house of our friends
the Corsacks, and inform the civil authorities of what mischief hath
befallen.’

The old seaman paused a moment. ‘It is hard lines for me,’ he said, ‘to
leave your honour in tribulation; and yet, staying here, I am only like
to make bad worse; and your honour’s sister, Miss Rachel, must be looked
to, that’s certain; for if the rogues once get their hand to mischief,
they will come to Mount Sharon after they have wasted and destroyed this
here snug little roadstead, where I thought to ride at anchor for life.’

‘Right, right, John Davies,’ said Joshua Geddes; ‘and best call the dogs
with you.’

‘Aye, aye, sir,’ said the veteran, ‘for they are something of my mind,
and would not keep quiet if they saw mischief doing; so maybe they might
come to mischief, poor dumb creatures. So God bless your honour--I
mean your worship--I cannot bring my mouth to say fare you well. Here,
Neptune, Thetis! come, dogs, come.’

So saying, and with a very crestfallen countenance, John Davies left the
hut.

‘Now there goes one of the best and most faithful creatures that ever
was born,’ said Mr. Geddes, as the superintendent shut the door of the
cottage. ‘Nature made him with a heart that would not have suffered him
to harm a fly; but thou seest, friend Latimer, that as men arm their
bull-dogs with spiked collars, and their game-cocks with steel spurs, to
aid them in fight, so they corrupt, by education, the best and mildest
natures, until fortitude and spirit become stubbornness and ferocity.
Believe me, friend Latimer, I would as soon expose my faithful household
dog to a vain combat with a herd of wolves, as yon trusty creature to
the violence of the enraged multitude. But I need say little on this
subject to thee, friend Latimer, who, I doubt not, art trained to
believe that courage is displayed and honour attained, not by doing
and suffering as becomes a man that which fate calls us to suffer and
justice commands us to do, but because thou art ready to retort violence
for violence, and considerest the lightest insult as a sufficient cause
for the spilling of blood, nay, the taking of life. But, leaving these
points of controversy to a more fit season, let us see what our basket
of provision contains; for in truth, friend Latimer, I am one of those
whom neither fear nor anxiety deprives of their ordinary appetite.’

We found the means of good cheer accordingly, which Mr. Geddes seemed to
enjoy as much as if it had been eaten in a situation of perfect safety;
nay, his conversation appeared to be rather more gay than on ordinary
occasions. After eating our supper, we left the hut together, and walked
for a few minutes on the banks of the sea. It was high water, and the
ebb had not yet commenced. The moon shone broad and bright upon the
placid face of the Solway Firth, and showed a slight ripple upon the
stakes, the tops of which were just visible above the waves, and on
the dark-coloured buoys which marked the upper edge of the enclosure of
nets. At a much greater distance--for the estuary is here very wide--the
line of the English coast was seen on the verge of the water, resembling
one of those fog-banks on which mariners are said to gaze, uncertain
whether it be land or atmospherical delusion.

‘We shall be undisturbed for some hours,’ said Mr. Geddes; ‘they will
not come down upon us: till the state of the tide permits them to
destroy the tide-nets. Is it not strange to think that human passions
will so soon transform such a tranquil scene as this into one of
devastation and confusion?’

It was indeed a scene of exquisite stillness; so much so, that the
restless waves of the Solway seemed, if not absolutely to sleep, at
least to slumber; on the shore no night-bird was heard--the cock had not
sung his first matins, and we ourselves walked more lightly than by day,
as if to suit the sounds of our own paces to the serene tranquillity
around us. At length, the plaintive cry of a dog broke the silence, and
on our return to the cottage, we found that the younger of the three
animals which had gone along with John Davies, unaccustomed, perhaps,
to distant journeys, and the duty of following to heel, had strayed from
the party, and, unable to rejoin them, had wandered back to the place of
its birth.

‘Another feeble addition to our feeble garrison,’ said Mr. Geddes, as he
caressed the dog, and admitted it into the cottage. ‘Poor thing! as thou
art incapable of doing any mischief, I hope thou wilt sustain none. At
least thou mayst do us the good service of a sentinel, and permit us to
enjoy a quiet repose, under the certainty that thou wilt alarm us when
the enemy is at hand.’

There were two beds in the superintendent’s room, upon which we threw
ourselves. Mr. Geddes, with his happy equanimity of temper, was asleep
in the first five minutes. I lay for some time in doubtful and anxious
thoughts, watching the fire, and the motions of the restless dog, which,
disturbed probably at the absence of John Davies, wandered from the
hearth to the door and back again, then came to the bedside and licked
my hands and face, and at length, experiencing no repulse to its
advances, established itself at my feet, and went to sleep, an example
which I soon afterwards followed.

The rage of narration, my dear Alan--for I will never relinquish the
hope that what I am writing may one day reach your hands--has
not forsaken me, even in my confinement, and the extensive though
unimportant details into which I have been hurried, renders it necessary
that I commence another sheet. Fortunately, my pygmy characters
comprehend a great many words within a small space of paper.





DARSIE LATIMER’S JOURNAL, IN CONTINUATION

The morning was dawning, and Mr. Geddes and I myself were still sleeping
soundly, when the alarm was given by my canine bedfellow, who first
growled deeply at intervals, and at length bore more decided testimony
to the approach of some enemy. I opened the door of the cottage, and
perceived, at the distance of about two hundred yards, a small but close
column of men, which I would have taken for a dark hedge, but that I
could perceive it was advancing rapidly and in silence.

The dog flew towards them, but instantly ran howling back to me, having
probably been chastised by a stick or a stone. Uncertain as to the plan
of tactics or of treaty which Mr. Geddes might think proper to adopt, I
was about to retire into the cottage, when he suddenly joined me at the
door, and, slipping his arm through mine, said, ‘Let us go to meet them
manfully; we have done nothing to be ashamed of.--Friends,’ he said,
raising his voice as we approached them, ‘who and what are you, and with
what purpose are you here on my property?’

A loud cheer was the answer returned, and a brace of fiddlers who
occupied the front of the march immediately struck up the insulting air,
the words of which begin--

  Merrily danced the Quaker’s wife,
  And merrily danced the Quaker.

Even at that moment of alarm, I think I recognized the tones of the
blind fiddler, Will, known by the name of Wandering Willie, from his
itinerant habits. They continued to advance swiftly and in great order,
in their front

  The fiery fiddlers playing martial airs;

when, coming close up, they surrounded us by a single movement, and
there was a universal cry, ‘Whoop, Quaker--whoop, Quaker! Here have we
them both, the wet Quaker and the dry one.’

‘Hang up the wet Quaker to dry, and wet the dry one with a ducking,’
answered another voice.

‘Where is the sea-otter, John Davies, that destroyed more fish than any
sealch upon Ailsa Craig?’ exclaimed a third voice. ‘I have an old crow
to pluck with him, and a pock to put the feathers in.’

We stood perfectly passive; for, to have attempted resistance against
more than a hundred men, armed with guns, fish-spears, iron-crows,
spades, and bludgeons, would have been an act of utter insanity. Mr.
Geddes, with his strong sonorous voice, answered the question about the
superintendent in a manner the manly indifference of which compelled
them to attend to him.

‘John Davies,’ he said, ‘will, I trust, soon be at Dumfries’--

‘To fetch down redcoats and dragoons against us, you canting old
villain!’

A blow was, at the same time, levelled at my friend, which I parried by
interposing the stick I had in my hand. I was instantly struck down, and
have a faint recollection of hearing some crying, ‘Kill the young spy!’
and others, as I thought, interposing on my behalf. But a second blow
on the head, received in the scuffle, soon deprived me of sense and
consciousness, and threw me into it state of insensibility, from which
I did not recover immediately. When I did come to myself, I was lying
on the bed from which I had just risen before the fray, and my poor
companion, the Newfoundland puppy, its courage entirely cowed by the
tumult of the riot, had crept as close to me as it could, and lay
trembling and whining, as if under the most dreadful terror. I doubted
at first whether I had not dreamed of the tumult, until, as I attempted
to rise, a feeling of pain and dizziness assured me that the injury
I had sustained was but too real. I gathered together my senses
listened--and heard at a distance the shouts of the rioters, busy,
doubtless, in their work of devastation. I made a second effort to rise,
or at least to turn myself, for I lay with my face to the wall of
the cottage, but I found that my limbs were secured, and my motions
effectually prevented--not indeed by cords, but by linen or cloth
bandages swathed around my ankles, and securing my arms to my sides.
Aware of my utterly captive condition, I groaned betwixt bodily pain and
mental distress,

A voice by my bedside whispered, in a whining tone, ‘Whisht a-ye,
hinnie--Whisht a-ye; haud your tongue, like a gude bairn--ye have cost
us dear aneugh already. My hinnie’s clean gane now.’

Knowing, as I thought, the phraseology of the wife of the itinerant
musician, I asked her where her husband was, and whether he had been
hurt.

‘Broken,’ answered the dame, ‘all broken to pieces; fit for naught but
to be made spunks of--the best blood that was in Scotland.’

‘Broken?--blood?--is your husband wounded; has there been bloodshed
broken limbs?’

‘Broken limbs I wish,’ answered the beldam, ‘that my hinnie had broken
the best bane in his body, before he had broken his fiddle, that was the
best blood in Scotland--it was a Cremony, for aught that I ken.’

‘Pshaw--only his fiddle?’ said I.

‘I dinna ken what waur your honour could have wished him to do, unless
he had broken his neck; and this is muckle the same to my hinnie Willie
and me. Chaw, indeed! It is easy to say chaw, but wha is to gie us ony
thing to chaw?--the bread-winner’s gane, and we may e’en sit down and
starve.’

‘No, no,’ I said, ‘I will pay you for twenty such fiddles.’

‘Twenty such! is that a’ ye ken about it? the country hadna the like
o’t. But if your honour were to pay us, as nae doubt wad be to your
credit here and hereafter, where are ye to get the siller?’

‘I have enough of money,’ said I, attempting to reach my hand towards my
side-pocket; ‘unloose these bandages, and I will pay you on the spot.’

This hint appeared to move her, and she was approaching the bedside, as
I hoped, to liberate me from my bonds, when a nearer and more desperate
shout was heard, as if the rioters were close by the hut.

‘I daurna I daurna,’ said the poor woman, ‘they would murder me and my
hinnie Willie baith, and they have misguided us aneugh already;--but if
there is anything worldly I could do for your honour, leave out loosing
ye?’

What she said recalled me to my bodily suffering. Agitation, and the
effects of the usage I had received, had produced a burning thirst. I
asked for a drink of water.

‘Heaven Almighty forbid that Epps Ainslie should gie ony sick gentleman
cauld well-water, and him in a fever. Na, na, hinnie, let me alane, I’ll
do better for ye than the like of that.’

‘Give me what you will,’ I replied; ‘let it but be liquid and cool.’

The woman gave me a large horn accordingly, filled with spirits and
water, which, without minute inquiry concerning the nature of its
contents, I drained at a draught. Either the spirits taken in such a
manner acted more suddenly than usual on my brain, or else there was
some drug mixed with the beverage. I remember little after drinking it
off, only that the appearance of things around me became indistinct;
that the woman’s form seemed to multiply itself, and to flit in various
figures around me, bearing the same lineaments as she herself did. I
remember also that the discordant noises and cries of those without the
cottage seemed to die away in a hum like that with which a nurse hushes
her babe. At length I fell into a deep sound sleep, or rather, a state
of absolute insensibility.

I have reason to think this species of trance lasted for many hours;
indeed, for the whole subsequent day and part of the night. It was not
uniformly so profound, for my recollection of it is chequered with many
dreams, all of a painful nature, but too faint and too indistinct to be
remembered. At length the moment of waking came, and my sensations were
horrible.

A deep sound, which, in the confusion of my senses, I identified with
the cries of the rioters, was the first thing of which I was sensible;
next, I became conscious that I was carried violently forward in some
conveyance, with an unequal motion, which gave me much pain. My position
was horizontal, and when I attempted to stretch my hands in order to
find some mode of securing myself against this species of suffering, I
found I was bound as before, and the horrible reality rushed on my
mind that I was in the hands of those who had lately committed a great
outrage on property, and were now about to kidnap, if not to murder me.
I opened my eyes, it was to no purpose--all around me was dark, for
a day had passed over during my captivity. A dispiriting sickness
oppressed my head--my heart seemed on fire, while my feet and hands were
chilled and benumbed with want of circulation. It was with the utmost
difficulty that I at length, and gradually, recovered in a sufficient
degree the power of observing external sounds and circumstances; and
when I did so, they presented nothing consolatory.

Groping with my hands, as far as the bandages would permit, and
receiving the assistance of some occasional glances of the moonlight, I
became aware that the carriage in which I was transported was one of the
light carts of the country, called TUMBLERS, and that a little attention
had been paid to my accommodation, as I was laid upon some sacks covered
with matting, and filled with straw. Without these, my condition would
have been still more intolerable, for the vehicle, sinking now on one
side, and now on the other, sometimes sticking absolutely fast and
requiring the utmost exertions of the animal which drew it to put it
once more in motion, was subjected to jolts in all directions, which
were very severe. At other times it rolled silently and smoothly over
what seemed to be wet sand; and, as I heard the distant roar of the
tide, I had little doubt that we were engaged in passing the formidable
estuary which divides the two kingdoms.

There seemed to be at least five or six people about the cart, some on
foot, others on horseback; the former lent assistance whenever it was in
danger of upsetting, or sticking fast in the quicksand; the others rode
before and acted as guides, often changing the direction of the vehicle
as the precarious state of the passage required.

I addressed myself to the men around the cart, and endeavoured to move
their compassion. I had harmed, I said, no one, and for no action in my
life had deserved such cruel treatment, I had no concern whatever in
the fishing station which had incurred their displeasure, and my
acquaintance with Mr. Geddes was of a very late date. Lastly, and as my
strongest argument, I endeavoured to excite their fears, by informing
them that my rank in life would not permit me to be either murdered or
secreted with impunity; and to interest their avarice, by the promises
I made them of reward, if they would effect my deliverance. I only
received a scornful laugh in reply to my threats; my promises might have
done more, for the fellows were whispering together as if in hesitation,
and I began to reiterate and increase my offers, when the voice of one
of the horsemen, who had suddenly come up, enjoined silence to the
men on foot, and, approaching the side of the cart, said to me, with
a strong and determined voice, ‘Young man, there is no personal harm
designed to you. If you remain silent and quiet, you may reckon on
good treatment; but if you endeavour to tamper with these men in the
execution of their duty, I will take such measures for silencing you, as
you shall remember the longest day you have to live.’

I thought I knew the voice which uttered these threats; but, in such
a situation, my perceptions could not be supposed to be perfectly
accurate. I was contented to reply, ‘Whoever you are that speak to me, I
entreat the benefit of the meanest prisoner, who is not to be subjected,
legally to greater hardship than is necessary for the restraint of his
person. I entreat that these bonds, which hurt me so cruelly, may be
slackened at least, if not removed altogether.’

‘I will slacken the belts,’ said the former speaker; ‘nay, I will
altogether remove them, and allow you to pursue your journey in a more
convenient manner, provided you will give me your word of honour that
you will not attempt an escape?’

‘NEVER!’ I answered, with an energy of which despair alone could have
rendered me capable--‘I will never submit to loss of freedom a moment
longer than I am subjected to it by force.’

‘Enough,’ he replied; ‘the sentiment is natural; but do not on your side
complain that I, who am carrying on an important undertaking, use the
only means in my power for ensuring its success.’

I entreated to know what it was designed to do with me; but my
conductor, in a voice of menacing authority, desired me to be silent on
my peril; and my strength and spirits were too much exhausted to permit
my continuing a dialogue so singular, even if I could have promised
myself any good result by doing so.

It is proper here to add, that, from my recollections at the time, and
from what has since taken place, I have the strongest possible belief
that the man with whom I held this expostulation was the singular person
residing at Brokenburn, in Dumfriesshire, and called by the fishers of
that hamlet, the Laird of the Solway Lochs. The cause for his inveterate
persecution I cannot pretend even to guess at.

In the meantime, the cart was dragged heavily and wearily on, until the
nearer roar of the advancing tide excited the apprehension of another
danger. I could not mistake the sound, which I had heard upon another
occasion, when it was only the speed of a fleet horse which saved me
from perishing in the quicksands. Thou, my dear Alan, canst not but
remember the former circumstances; and now, wonderful contrast! the very
man, to the best of my belief, who then saved me from peril, was
the leader of the lawless band who had deprived me of my liberty. I
conjectured that the danger grew imminent; for I heard some words and
circumstances which made me aware that a rider hastily fastened his own
horse to the shafts of the cart in order to assist the exhausted animal
which drew it, and the vehicle was now pulled forward at a faster pace,
which the horses were urged to maintain by blows and curses. The
men, however, were inhabitants of the neighbourhood; and I had strong
personal reason to believe that one of them, at least, was intimately
acquainted with all the depths and shallows of the perilous paths in
which we were engaged. But they were in imminent danger themselves; and
if so, as from the whispering and exertions to push on with the cart
was much to be apprehended, there was little doubt that I should be left
behind as a useless encumbrance, and that, while I was in a condition
which rendered every chance of escape impracticable. These were awful
apprehensions; but it pleased Providence to increase them to a point
which my brain was scarcely able to endure.

As we approached very near to a black line, which, dimly visible as it
was, I could make out to be the shore, we heard two or three sounds,
which appeared to be the report of fire-arms. Immediately all was bustle
among our party to get forward. Presently a fellow galloped up to us,
crying out, ‘Ware hawk! ware hawk! the land-sharks are out from Burgh,
and Allonby Tom will lose his cargo if you do not bear a hand.’

Most of my company seemed to make hastily for the shore on receiving
this intelligence. A driver was left with the cart; but at length, when,
after repeated and hairbreadth escapes, it actually stuck fast in a
slough or quicksand, the fellow, with an oath, cut the harness, and, as
I presume, departed with the horses, whose feet I heard splashing over
the wet sand and through the shallows, as he galloped off.

The dropping sound of fire-arms was still continued, but lost almost
entirely in the thunder of the advancing surge. By a desperate effort I
raised myself in the cart, and attained a sitting posture, which served
only to show me the extent of my danger. There lay my native land--my
own England--the land where I was born, and to which my wishes, since
my earliest age, had turned with all the prejudices of national
feeling--there it lay, within a furlong of the place where I yet was;
that furlong, which an infant would have raced over in a minute, was yet
a barrier effectual to divide me for ever from England and from life. I
soon not only heard the roar of this dreadful torrent, but saw, by
the fitful moonlight, the foamy crests of the devouring waves, as they
advanced with the speed and fury of a pack of hungry wolves.

The consciousness that the slightest ray of hope, or power of
struggling, was not left me, quite overcame the constancy which I had
hitherto maintained. My eyes began to swim--my head grew giddy and mad
with fear--I chattered and howled to the howling and roaring sea. One
or two great waves already reached the cart, when the conductor of the
party whom I have mentioned so often, was, as if by magic, at my side.
He sprang from his horse into the vehicle, cut the ligatures which
restrained me, and bade me get up and mount in the fiend’s name.

Seeing I was incapable of obeying, he seized me as if I had been a
child of six months old, threw me across the horse, sprang on behind,
supporting with one hand, while he directed the animal with the other.
In my helpless and painful posture, I was unconscious of the degree
of danger which we incurred; but I believe at one time the horse was
swimming, or nearly so; and that it was with difficulty that my stern
and powerful assistant kept my head above water. I remember particularly
the shock which I felt when the animal, endeavouring to gain the bank,
reared, and very nearly fell back on his burden. The time during which
I continued in this dreadful condition did not probably exceed two or
three minutes, yet so strongly were they marked with horror and agony,
that they seem to my recollection a much more considerable space of
time.

When I had been thus snatched from destruction, I had only power to say
to my protector,--or oppressor,--for he merited either name at my hand,
‘You do not, then, design to murder me?’

He laughed as he replied, but it was a sort of laughter which I scarce
desire to hear again,--‘Else you think I had let the waves do the work?
But remember, the shepherd saves his sheep from the torrent--is it to
preserve its life?--Be silent, however, with questions or entreaties.
What I mean to do, thou canst no more discover or prevent, than a man,
with his bare palm, can scoop dry the Solway.’

I was too much exhausted to continue the argument; and, still numbed and
torpid in all my limbs, permitted myself without reluctance to be placed
on a horse brought for the purpose. My formidable conductor rode on the
one side, and another person on the other, keeping me upright in the
saddle. In this manner we travelled forward at a considerable rate,
and by by-roads, with which my attendant seemed as familiar as with the
perilous passages of the Solway.

At length, after stumbling through a labyrinth of dark and deep lanes,
and crossing more than one rough and barren heath, we found ourselves on
the edge of a highroad, where a chaise and four awaited, as it appeared,
our arrival. To my great relief, we now changed our mode of conveyance;
for my dizziness and headache had returned in so strong a degree, that I
should otherwise have been totally unable to keep my seat on horseback,
even with the support which I received.

My doubted and dangerous companion signed to me to enter the
carriage--the man who had ridden on the left side of my horse stepped in
after me, and drawing up the blinds of the vehicle, gave the signal for
instant departure.

I had obtained a glimpse of the countenance of my new companion, as by
the aid of a dark lantern the drivers opened the carriage door, and
I was wellnigh persuaded that I recognized in him the domestic of the
leader of this party, whom I had seen at his house in Brokenburn on a
former occasion. To ascertain the truth of my suspicion, I asked him
whether his name was not Cristal Nixon.

‘What is other folk’s names to you,’ he replied, gruffly, ‘who cannot
tell your own father and mother?’

‘You know them, perhaps!’ I exclaimed eagerly. ‘You know them! and with
that secret is connected the treatment which I am now receiving? It must
be so, for in my life have I never injured any one. Tell me the cause of
my misfortunes, or rather, help me to my liberty, and I will reward you
richly.’

‘Aye, aye,’ replied my keeper; ‘but what use to give you liberty, who
know nothing how to use it like a gentleman, but spend your time with
Quakers and fiddlers, and such like raff! If I was your--hem, hem, hem!’

Here Cristal stopped short, just on the point, as it appeared, when some
information was likely to escape him. I urged him once more to be my
friend, and promised him all the stock of money which I had about me,
and it was not inconsiderable, if he would assist in my escape.

He listened, as if to a proposition which had some interest, and
replied, but in a voice rather softer than before, ‘Aye, but men do not
catch old birds with chaff, my master. Where have you got the rhino you
are so flush of?’

‘I will give you earnest directly, and that in banknotes,’ said I; but
thrusting my hand into my side-pocket, I found my pocket-book was gone.
I would have persuaded myself that it was only the numbness of my hands
which prevented my finding it; but Cristal Nixon, who bears in his
countenance that cynicism which is especially entertained with human
misery, no longer suppressed his laughter.

‘Oh, ho! my young master,’ he said; ‘we have taken good enough care you
have not kept the means of bribing poor folk’s fidelity. What, man, they
have souls as well as other people, and to make them break trust is
a deadly sin. And as for me, young gentleman, if you would fill Saint
Mary’s Kirk with gold, Cristal Nixon would mind it no more than so many
chucky-stones.’

I would have persisted, were it but in hopes of his letting drop that
which it concerned me to know, but he cut off further communication, by
desiring me to lean back in the corner and go to sleep.

‘Thou art cock-brained enough already,’ he added, ‘and we shall have thy
young pate addled entirely, if you do not take some natural rest.’

I did indeed require repose, if not slumber; the draught which I had
taken continued to operate, and, satisfied in my own mind that no
attempt on my life was designed, the fear of instant death no longer
combated the torpor which crept over me--I slept, and slept soundly, but
still without refreshment.

When I awoke, I found myself extremely indisposed; images of the past,
and anticipations of the future, floated confusedly through my brain.
I perceived, however, that my situation was changed, greatly for the
better. I was in a good bed, with the curtains drawn round it; I heard
the lowered voice and cautious step of attendants, who seemed to respect
my repose; it appeared as if I was in the hands either of friends, or of
such as meant me no personal harm.

I can give but an indistinct account of two or three broken and feverish
days which succeeded, but if they were chequered with dreams and
visions of terror, other and more agreeable objects were also sometimes
presented. Alan Fairford will understand me when I say, I am convinced I
saw G.M. during this interval of oblivion. I had medical attendance, and
was bled more than once. I also remember a painful operation performed
on my head, where I had received a severe blow on the night of the riot.
My hair was cut short, and the bone of the skull examined, to discover
if the cranium had received any injury.

On seeing the physician, it would have been natural to have appealed
to him on the subject of my confinement, and I remember more than once
attempting to do so. But the fever lay like a spell upon my tongue, and
when I would have implored the doctor’s assistance, I rambled from the
subject, and spoke I know not what nonsense. Some power, which I
was unable to resist, seemed to impel me into a different course of
conversation from what I intended, and though conscious, in some degree,
of the failure, I could not mend it; and resolved, therefore, to be
patient, until my capacity of steady thought and expression was restored
to me with my ordinary health, which had sustained a severe shock from
the vicissitudes to which I had been exposed. [See Note 6.]





DARSIE LATIMER’S JOURNAL, IN CONTINUATION

Two or three days, perhaps more, perhaps less, had been spent in bed,
where I was carefully attended, and treated, I believe, with as much
judgement as the case required, and I was at length allowed to quit
my bed, though not the chamber. I was now more able to make some
observation on the place of my confinement.

The room, in appearance and furniture, resembled the best apartment in
a farmer’s house; and the window, two stories high, looked into a
backyard, or court, filled with domestic poultry. There were the usual
domestic offices about this yard. I could distinguish the brewhouse and
the barn, and I heard, from a more remote building, the lowing of the
cattle, and other rural sounds, announcing a large and well-stocked
farm. These were sights and sounds qualified to dispel any apprehension
of immediate violence. Yet the building seemed ancient and strong, a
part of the roof was battlemented, and the walls were of great thickness;
lastly, I observed, with some unpleasant sensations, that the windows
of my chamber had been lately secured with iron stanchions, and that
the servants who brought me victuals, or visited my apartment to render
other menial offices, always locked the door when they retired.

The comfort and cleanliness of my chamber were of true English growth,
and such as I had rarely seen on the other side of the Tweed; the very
old wainscot, which composed the floor and the panelling of the room,
was scrubbed with a degree of labour which the Scottish housewife rarely
bestows on her most costly furniture.

The whole apartments appropriated to my use consisted of the bedroom, a
small parlour adjacent, within which was a still smaller closet having
a narrow window which seemed anciently to have been used as a shot-hole,
admitting, indeed, a very moderate portion of light and air, but without
its being possible to see anything from it except the blue sky, and
that only by mounting on a chair. There were appearances of a separate
entrance into this cabinet, besides that which communicated with the
parlour, but it had been recently built up, as I discovered by removing
a piece of tapestry which covered the fresh mason-work. I found some
of my clothes here, with linen and other articles, as well as my
writing-case, containing pen, ink, and paper, which enables me, at my
leisure (which, God knows, is undisturbed enough) to make this record of
my confinement. It may be well believed, however, that I do not trust
to the security of the bureau, but carry the written sheets about my
person, so that I can only be deprived of them by actual violence. I
also am cautious to write in the little cabinet only, so that I can
hear any person approach me through the other apartments, and have time
enough to put aside my journal before they come upon me.

The servants, a stout country fellow and a very pretty milkmaid-looking
lass, by whom I am attended, seem of the true Joan and Hedge school,
thinking of little and desiring nothing beyond the very limited sphere
of their own duties or enjoyments, and having no curiosity whatever
about the affairs of others. Their behaviour to me in particular, is,
at the same time, very kind and very provoking. My table is abundantly
supplied, and they seem anxious to comply with my taste in that
department. But whenever I make inquiries beyond ‘what’s for dinner’,
the brute of a lad baffles me by his ANAN, and his DUNNA KNAW, and if
hard pressed, turns his back on me composedly, and leaves the room. The
girl, too, pretends to be as simple as he; but an arch grin, which
she cannot always suppress, seems to acknowledge that she understands
perfectly well the game which she is playing, and is determined to keep
me in ignorance. Both of them, and the wench in particular, treat me
as they would do a spoiled child, and never directly refuse me anything
which I ask, taking care, at the same time, not to make their words good
by effectually granting my request. Thus, if I desire to go out, I am
promised by Dorcas that I shall walk in the park at night, and see the
cows milked, just as she would propose such an amusement to a child. But
she takes care never to keep her word, if it is in her power to do so.

In the meantime, there has stolen on me insensibly an indifference to
my freedom--a carelessness about my situation, for which I am unable to
account, unless it be the consequence of weakness and loss of blood. I
have read of men who, immured as I am, have surprised the world by the
address with which they have successfully overcome the most formidable
obstacles to their escape; and when I have heard such anecdotes, I
have said to myself, that no one who is possessed only of a fragment
of freestone, or a rusty nail to grind down rivets and to pick locks,
having his full leisure to employ in the task, need continue the
inhabitant of a prison. Here, however, I sit, day after day, without a
single effort to effect my liberation.

Yet my inactivity is not the result of despondency, but arises, in
part at least, from feelings of a very different cast. My story, long
a mysterious one, seems now upon the verge of some strange development;
and I feel a solemn impression that I ought to wait the course of
events, to struggle against which is opposing my feeble efforts to the
high will of fate. Thou, my Alan, wilt treat as timidity this passive
acquiescence, which has sunk down on me like a benumbing torpor; but if
thou hast remembered by what visions my couch was haunted, and dost but
think of the probability that I am in the vicinity, perhaps under the
same roof with G.M., thou wilt acknowledge that other feelings than
pusillanimity have tended in some degree to reconcile me to my fate.

Still I own it is unmanly to submit with patience to this oppressive
confinement. My heart rises against it, especially when I sit down to
record my sufferings in this journal, and I am determined, as the first
step to my deliverance, to have my letters sent to the post-house. ----

I am disappointed. When the girl Dorcas, upon whom I had fixed for a
messenger, heard me talk of sending a letter, she willingly offered her
services, and received the crown which I gave her (for my purse had not
taken flight with the more valuable contents of my pocket-book) with a
smile which showed her whole set of white teeth.

But when, with the purpose of gaining some intelligence respecting my
present place of abode, I asked to which post-town she was to send or
carry the letter, a stolid ‘ANAN’ showed me she was either ignorant of
the nature of a post-office, or that, for the present, she chose to seem
so.--‘Simpleton!’ I said, with some sharpness.

‘O Lord, sir!’ answered the girl, turning pale, which they always do
when I show any sparks of anger, ‘Don’t put yourself in a passion--I’ll
put the letter in the post.

‘What! and not know the name of the post-town?’ said I, out of patience.
‘How on earth do you propose to manage that?’

‘La you there, good master. What need you frighten a poor girl that is
no schollard, bating what she learned at the Charity School of Saint
Bees?’

‘Is Saint Bees far from this place, Dorcas? Do you send your letters
there?’ said I, in a manner as insinuating, and yet careless, as I could
assume.

‘Saint Bees! La, who but a madman--begging your honour’s pardon--it’s a
matter of twenty years since fader lived at Saint Bees, which is twenty,
or forty, or I dunna know not how many miles from this part, to the
West, on the coast side; and I would not have left Saint Bees, but that
fader’--

‘Oh, the devil take your father!’ replied I.

To which she answered, ‘Nay, but thof your honour be a little
how-come-so, you shouldn’t damn folk’s faders; and I won’t stand to it,
for one.’

‘Oh, I beg you a thousand pardons--I wish your father no ill in the
world--he was a very honest man in his way.’

‘WAS an honest man!’ she exclaimed; for the Cumbrians are, it would
seem, like their neighbours the Scotch, ticklish on the point of
ancestry,--‘He IS a very honest man as ever led nag with halter on head
to Staneshaw Bank Fair. Honest! He is a horse-couper.’

‘Right, right,’ I replied; ‘I know it--I have heard of your father-as
honest as any horse-couper of them all. Why, Dorcas, I mean to buy a
horse of him.’

‘Ah, your honour,’ sighed Dorcas, ‘he is the man to serve your honour
well--if ever you should get round again--or thof you were a bit off the
hooks, he would no more cheat you than’--

‘Well, well, we will deal, my girl, you may depend on’t. But tell me
now, were I to give you a letter, what would you do to get it forward?’

‘Why, put it into Squire’s own bag that hangs in hall,’ answered poor
Dorcas. ‘What else could I do? He sends it to Brampton, or to Carloisle,
or where it pleases him, once a week, and that gate.’

‘Ah!’ said I; ‘and I suppose your sweetheart John carries it?’

‘Noa--disn’t now--and Jan is no sweetheart of mine, ever since he danced
at his mother’s feast with Kitty Rutlege, and let me sit still; that a
did.’

‘It was most abominable in Jan, and what I could never have thought of
him,’ I replied.

‘Oh, but a did though--a let me sit still on my seat, a did.’

‘Well, well, my pretty May, you will get a handsomer fellow than
Jan--Jan’s not the fellow for you, I see that.’

‘Noa, noa,’ answered the damsel; ‘but he is weel aneugh for a’ that,
mon. But I carena a button for him; for there is the miller’s son, that
suitored me last Appleby Fair, when I went wi’ oncle, is a gway canny
lad as you will see in the sunshine.’

‘Aye, a fine stout fellow. Do you think he would carry my letter to
Carlisle?’

‘To Carloisle! ‘Twould be all his life is worth; he maun wait on clap
and hopper, as they say. Odd, his father would brain him if he went to
Carloisle, bating to wrestling for the belt, or sic loike. But I ha’
more bachelors than him; there is the schoolmaster, can write almaist as
weel as tou canst, mon.’

‘Then he is the very man to take charge of a letter; he knows the
trouble of writing one.’

‘Aye, marry does he, an tou comest to that, mon; only it takes him four
hours to write as mony lines. Tan, it is a great round hand loike, that
one can read easily, and not loike your honour’s, that are like midge’s
taes. But for ganging to Carloisle, he’s dead foundered, man, as cripple
as Eckie’s mear.’

‘In the name of God,’ said I, ‘how is it that you propose to get my
letter to the post?’

‘Why, just to put it into Squire’s bag loike,’ reiterated Dorcas; ‘he
sends it by Cristal Nixon to post, as you call it, when such is his
pleasure.’

Here I was, then, not much edified by having obtained a list of Dorcas’s
bachelors; and by finding myself, with respect to any information
which I desired, just exactly at the point where I set out. It was of
consequence to me, however, to accustom, the girl to converse with me
familiarly. If she did so, she could not always be on her guard,
and something, I thought, might drop from her which I could turn to
advantage.

‘Does not the Squire usually look into his letter-bag, Dorcas?’ said I,
with as much indifference as I could assume.

‘That a does,’ said Dorcas; ‘and a threw out a letter of mine to Raff
Miller, because a said’--

‘Well, well, I won’t trouble him with mine,’ said I, ‘Dorcas; but,
instead, I will write to himself, Dorcas. But how shall I address him?’

‘Anan?’ was again Dorcas’s resource.

‘I mean how is he called? What is his name?’

‘Sure you honour should know best,’ said Dorcas.

‘I know? The devil! You drive me beyond patience.’

‘Noa, noa! donna your honour go beyond patience--donna ye now,’
implored the wench. ‘And for his neame, they say he has mair nor ane
in Westmoreland and on the Scottish side. But he is but seldom wi’
us, excepting in the cocking season; and then we just call him Squoire
loike; and so do my measter and dame.’

‘And is he here at present?’ said I.

‘Not he, not he; he is a buck-hoonting, as they tell me, somewhere up
the Patterdale way; but he comes and gangs like a flap of a whirlwind,
or sic loike.’

I broke off the conversation, after forcing on Dorcas a little silver
to buy ribbons, with which she was so much delighted that she exclaimed,
‘God! Cristal Nixon may say his worst on thee; but thou art a civil
gentleman for all him; and a quoit man wi’ woman folk loike.’

There is no sense in being too quiet with women folk, so I added a kiss
with my crown piece; and I cannot help thinking that I have secured
a partisan in Dorcas. At least, she blushed, and pocketed her little
compliment with one hand, while, with the other, she adjusted her
cherry-coloured ribbons, a little disordered by the struggle it cost me
to attain the honour of a salute.

As she unlocked the door to leave the apartment, she turned back,
and looking on me with a strong expression of compassion, added the
remarkable words, ‘La--be’st mad or no, thou’se a mettled lad, after
all.’

There was something very ominous in the sound of these farewell words,
which seemed to afford me a clue to the pretext under which I was
detained in confinement, My demeanour was probably insane enough, while
I was agitated at once by the frenzy incident to the fever, and the
anxiety arising from my extraordinary situation. But is it possible they
can now establish any cause for confining me arising out of the state of
my mind?

If this be really the pretext under which I am restrained from my
liberty, nothing but the sedate correctness of my conduct can remove the
prejudices which these circumstances may have excited in the minds of
all who have approached me during my illness. I have heard--dreadful
thought!--of men who, for various reasons, have been trepanned into
the custody of the keepers of private madhouses, and whose brain,
after years of misery, became at length unsettled, through irresistible
sympathy with the wretched beings among whom they were classed. This
shall not be my case, if, by strong internal resolution, it is in human
nature to avoid the action of exterior and contagious sympathies.

Meantime I sat down to compose and arrange my thoughts, for my purposed
appeal to my jailer--so I must call him--whom I addressed in the
following manner; having at length, and after making several copies,
found language to qualify the sense of resentment which burned in
the first, drafts of my letter, and endeavoured to assume a tone more
conciliating. I mentioned the two occasions on which he had certainly
saved my life, when at the utmost peril; and I added, that whatever was
the purpose of the restraint, now practised on me, as I was given to
understand, by his authority, it could not certainly be with any view
to ultimately injuring me. He might, I said, have mistaken me for some
other person; and I gave him what account I could of my situation and
education, to correct such an error. I supposed it next possible, that
he might think me too weak for travelling, and not capable of taking
care of myself; and I begged to assure him, that I was restored to
perfect health, and quite able to endure the fatigue of a journey.
Lastly, I reminded him, in firm though measured terms, that the
restraint which I sustained was an illegal one, and highly punishable
by the laws which protect the liberties of the subject. I ended by
demanding that he would take me before a magistrate; or, at least, that
he would favour me with a personal interview and explain his meaning
with regard to me.

Perhaps this letter was expressed in a tone too humble for the
situation of an injured man, and I am inclined to think so when I again
recapitulate its tenor. But what could I do? I was in the power of one
whose passions seem as violent as his means of gratifying them appear
unbounded. I had reason, too, to believe (this to thee, Alan) that all
his family did not approve of the violence of his conduct towards me; my
object, in fine, was freedom, and who would not sacrifice much to attain
it?

I had no means of addressing my letter excepting ‘For the Squire’s
own hand.’ He could be at no great distance, for in the course of
twenty-four hours I received an answer. It was addressed to Darsie
Latimer, and contained these words: ‘You have demanded an interview with
me. You have required to be carried before a magistrate. Your first wish
shall be granted--perhaps the second also. Meanwhile, be assured that
you are a prisoner for the time, by competent authority, and that
such authority is supported by adequate power. Beware, therefore, of
struggling with a force sufficient to crush you, but abandon yourself to
that train of events by which we are both swept along, and which it is
impossible that either of us can resist.’

These mysterious words were without signature of any kind, and left
me nothing more important to do than to prepare myself for the meeting
which they promised. For that purpose I must now break off, and make
sure of the manuscript--so far as I can, in my present condition, be
sure of anything--by concealing it within the lining of my coat, so as
not to be found without strict search.





LATIMER’S JOURNAL, IN CONTINUATION

The important interview expected at the conclusion of my last took place
sooner than I had calculated; for the very day I received the letter,
and just when my dinner was finished, the squire, or whatever he is
called, entered the room so suddenly that I almost thought I beheld an
apparition. The figure of this man is peculiarly noble and stately,
and his voice has that deep fullness of accent which implies unresisted
authority. I had risen involuntarily as he entered; we gazed on each
other for a moment in silence, which was at length broken by my visitor.

‘You have desired to see me,’ he said. ‘I am here; if you have aught
to say let me hear it; my time is too brief to be consumed in childish
dumb-show.’

‘I would ask of you,’ said I, ‘by what authority I am detained in this
place of confinement, and for what purpose?’

‘I have told you already,’ said he, ‘that my authority is sufficient,
and my power equal to it; this is all which it is necessary for you at
present to know.’

‘Every British subject has a right to know why he suffers restraint,’
I replied; ‘nor can he be deprived of liberty without a legal warrant.
Show me that by which you confine me thus.’

‘You shall see more,’ he said; ‘you shall see the magistrate by whom it
is granted, and that without a moment’s delay.’

This sudden proposal fluttered and alarmed me; I felt, nevertheless,
that I had the right cause, and resolved to plead it boldly, although
I could well have desired a little further time for preparation. He
turned, however, threw open the door of the apartment, and commanded me
to follow him. I felt some inclination, when I crossed the threshold of
my prison-chamber, to have turned and run for it; but I knew not where
to find the stairs--had reason to think the outer doors would be secured
and, to conclude, so soon as I had quitted the room to follow the proud
step of my conductor, I observed that I was dogged by Cristal Nixon, who
suddenly appeared within two paces of me, and with whose great personal
strength, independent of the assistance he might have received from
his master, I saw no chance of contending. I therefore followed,
unresistingly and in silence; along one or two passages of much greater
length than consisted with the ideas I had previously entertained of
the size of the house. At length a door was flung open, and we entered
a large, old-fashioned parlour, having coloured glass in the windows,
oaken panelling on the wall, a huge grate, in which a large faggot
or two smoked under an arched chimney-piece of stone which bore some
armorial device, whilst the walls were adorned with the usual number
of heroes in armour, with large wigs instead of helmets, and ladies in
sacques, smelling to nosegays.

Behind a long table, on which were several books, sat a smart
underbred-looking man, wearing his own hair tied in a club, and who,
from the quire of paper laid before him, and the pen which he handled
at my entrance, seemed prepared to officiate as clerk. As I wish to
describe these persons as accurately as possible, I may add, he wore a
dark-coloured coat, corduroy breeches, and spatterdashes. At the
upper end of the same table, in an ample easy-chair covered with black
leather, reposed a fat personage, about fifty years old, who either was
actually a country justice, or was well selected to represent such a
character. His leathern breeches were faultless in make, his jockey
boots spotless in the varnish, and a handsome and flourishing pair of
boot-garters, as they are called, united the one part of his garments to
the other; in fine, a richly-laced scarlet waistcoat and a purple coat
set off the neat though corpulent figure of the little man, and threw an
additional bloom upon his plethoric aspect. I suppose he had dined,
for it was two hours past noon, and he was amusing himself, and aiding
digestion, with a pipe of tobacco. There was an air of importance in his
manner which corresponded to the rural dignity of his exterior, and a
habit which he had of throwing out a number of interjectional sounds,
uttered with a strange variety of intonation running from bass up to
treble in a very extraordinary manner, or breaking off his sentences
with a whiff of his pipe, seemed adopted to give an air of thought and
mature deliberation to his opinions and decisions. Notwithstanding
all this, Alan, it might be DOOTED, as our old Professor used to say,
whether the Justice was anything more then an ass. Certainly, besides a
great deference for the legal opinion of his clerk, which might be quite
according to the order of things, he seemed to be wonderfully under the
command of his brother squire, if squire either of them were, and indeed
much more than was consistent with so much assumed consequence of his
own.

‘Ho--ha--aye--so--so--hum--humph--this is the young man, I
suppose--hum--aye--seems sickly. Young gentleman, you may sit down.’

I used the permission given, for I had been much more reduced by my
illness than I was aware of, and felt myself really fatigued, even by
the few paces I had walked, joined to the agitation I suffered.

‘And your name, young man, is--humph--aye--ha--what is it?’

‘Darsie Latimer.’

‘Right--aye--humph--very right. Darsie Latimer is the very
thing--ha--aye--where do you come from?’

‘From Scotland, sir,’ I replied.

‘A native of Scotland--a--humph--eh--how is it?’

‘I am an Englishman by birth, sir.’

‘Right--aye--yes, you are so. But pray, Mr. Darsie Latimer, have you
always been called by that name, or have you any other?--Nick, write
down his answers, Nick.’

‘As far as I remember, I never bore any other,’ was my answer.

‘How, no? well, I should not have thought so, Hey, neighbour, would
you?’

Here he looked towards the other squire, who had thrown himself into a
chair; and, with his legs stretched out before him, and his arms folded
on his bosom, seemed carelessly attending to what was going forward.
He answered the appeal of the Justice by saying, that perhaps the young
man’s memory did not go back to a very early period.

‘Ah--eh--ha--you hear the gentleman. Pray, how far may your memory be
pleased to run back to?--umph?’

‘Perhaps, sir, to the age of three years, or a little further.’

‘And will you presume to say, sir,’ said the squire, drawing himself
suddenly erect in his seat, and exerting the strength of his powerful
voice, ‘that you then bore your present name?’

I was startled at the confidence with which this question was put, and
in vain rummaged my memory for the means of replying. ‘At least,’ I
said, ‘I always remember being called Darsie; children, at that early
age, seldom get more than their Christian name.’

‘Oh, I thought so,’ he replied, and again stretched himself on his seat,
in the same lounging posture as before.

‘So you were called Darsie in your infancy,’ said the Justice;
‘and--hum--aye--when did you first take the name of Latimer?’

‘I did not take it, sir; it was given to me.’

‘I ask you,’ said the lord of the mansion, but with less severity in his
voice than formerly, ‘whether you can remember that you were ever called
Latimer, until you had that name given you in Scotland?’

‘I will be candid: I cannot recollect an instance that I was so called
when in England, but neither can I recollect when the name was first
given me; and if anything is to be founded on these queries and my
answers, I desire my early childhood may be taken into consideration.’

‘Hum--aye--yes,’ said the Justice; ‘all that requires consideration
shall be duly considered. Young man--eh--I beg to know the name of your
father and mother?’

This was galling a wound that has festered for years, and I did not
endure the question so patiently as those which preceded it; but
replied, ‘I demand, in my turn, to know if I am before an English
Justice of the Peace?’

‘His worship, Squire Foxley, of Foxley Hall, has been of the quorum
these twenty years,’ said Master Nicholas.

‘Then he ought to know, or you, sir, as his clerk, should inform him,’
said I, ‘that I am the complainer in this case, and that my complaint
ought to be heard before I am subjected to cross-examination.’

‘Humph--hoy--what, aye--there is something in that, neighbour,’ said
the poor Justice, who, blown about by every wind of doctrine, seemed
desirous to attain the sanction of his brother squire.

‘I wonder at you, Foxley,’ said his firm-minded acquaintance; ‘how can
you render the young man justice unless you know who he is?’

‘Ha--yes--egad, that’s true,’ said Mr. Justice Foxley; ‘and now--looking
into the matter more closely--there is, eh, upon the whole--nothing
at all in what he says--so, sir, you must tell your father’s name, and
surname.’

‘It is out of my power, sir; they are not known to me, since you must
needs know so much of my private affairs.’

The Justice collected a great AFFLATUS in his cheeks, which puffed them
up like those of a Dutch cherub, while his eyes seemed flying out of his
head, from the effort with which he retained his breath. He then blew
it forth with,--‘Whew!--Hoom--poof--ha!--not know your parents,
youngster?--Then I must commit you for a vagrant, I warrant you. OMNE
IGNOTUM PRO TERRIBILI, as we used to say at Appleby school; that is,
every one that is not known to the Justice; is a rogue and a vagabond.
Ha!--aye, you may sneer, sir; but I question if you would have known the
meaning of that Latin, unless I had told you.’

I acknowledged myself obliged for a new edition of the adage, and an
interpretation which I could never have reached alone and unassisted. I
then proceeded to state my case with greater confidence. The Justice
was an ass, that was clear; but if was scarcely possible he could be so
utterly ignorant as not to know what was necessary in so plain a case as
mine. I therefore informed him of the riot which had been committed on
the Scottish side of the Solway Firth, explained how I came to be placed
in my present situation, and requested of his worship to set me at
liberty. I pleaded my cause with as much earnestness as I could, casting
an eye from time to time upon the opposite party, who seemed entirely
indifferent to all the animation with which I accused him.

As for the Justice, when at length I had ceased, as really not
knowing what more to say in a case so very plain, he replied,
‘Ho--aye--aye--yes--wonderful! and so this is all the gratitude you show
to this good gentleman for the great charge and trouble he hath had with
respect to and concerning of you?’

‘He saved my life, sir, I acknowledge, on one occasion certainly, and
most probably on two; but his having done so gives him no right over my
person. I am not, however, asking for any punishment or revenge; on the
contrary, I am content to part friends with the gentleman, whose motives
I am unwilling to suppose are bad, though his actions have been, towards
me, unauthorized and violent.’

This moderation, Alan, thou wilt comprehend, was not entirely dictated
by my feelings towards the individual of whom I complained; there were
other reasons, in which regard for him had little share. It seemed,
however, as if the mildness with which I pleaded my cause had more
effect upon him than anything I had yet said. We was moved to the point
of being almost out of countenance; and took snuff repeatedly, as if to
gain time to stifle some degree of emotion.

But on Justice Foxley, on whom my eloquence was particularly designed to
make impression, the result was much less favourable. He consulted in a
whisper with Mr. Nicholas, his clerk--pshawed, hemmed, and elevated
his eyebrows, as if in scorn of my supplication. At length, having
apparently made up his mind, he leaned back in his chair, and smoked
his pipe with great energy, with a look of defiance, designed to make me
aware that all my reasoning was lost on him.

At length, when I stopped, more from lack of breath than want of
argument, he opened his oracular jaws, and made the following reply,
interrupted by his usual interjectional ejaculations, and by long
volumes of smoke:--‘Hem--aye--eh--poof. And, youngster, do you think
Matthew Foxley, who has been one of the quorum for these twenty years,
is to be come over with such trash as would hardly cheat an apple-woman?
Poof--poof--eh! Why, man--eh--dost thou not know the charge is not a
bailable matter--and that--hum--aye--the greatest man--poof--the Baron
of Graystock himself, must stand committed? and yet you pretend to have
been kidnapped by this gentleman, and robbed of property, and what not;
and--eh--poof--you would persuade me all you want is to get away from
him? I do believe--eh--that it IS all you want. Therefore, as you are
a sort of a slip-string gentleman, and--aye--hum--a kind of idle
apprentice, and something cock-brained withal, as the honest folks
of the house tell me--why, you must e’en remain under custody of your
guardian, till your coming of age, or my Lord Chancellor’s warrant,
shall give you the management of your own affairs, which, if you can
gather your brains again, you will even then not be--aye--hem--poof--in
particular haste to assume.’

The time occupied by his worship’s hums, and haws, and puffs of tobacco
smoke, together with the slow and pompous manner in which he spoke, gave
me a minute’s space to collect my ideas, dispersed as they were by the
extraordinary purport of this annunciation.

‘I cannot conceive, sir,’ I replied, ‘by what singular tenure this
person claims my obedience as a guardian; it is a barefaced imposture. I
never in my life saw him, until I came unhappily to this country, about
four weeks since.’

‘Aye, sir--we--eh--know, and are aware--that--poof--you do not like
to hear some folk’s names; and that--eh--you understand me--there are
things, and sounds, and matters, conversation about names, and suchlike,
which put you off the hooks--which I have no humour to witness.
Nevertheless, Mr. Darsie--or--poof--Mr. Darsie Latimer--or--poof,
poof--eh--aye, Mr. Darsie without the Latimer--you have acknowledged
as much to-day as assures me you will best be disposed of under the
honourable care of my friend here--all your confessions--besides that,
poof--eh--I know him to be a most responsible person--a--hay--aye--most
responsible and honourable person--Can you deny this?’

‘I know nothing of him,’ I repeated; ‘not even his name; and I have not,
as I told you, seen him in the course of my whole life, till a few weeks
since.’

‘Will you swear to that?’ said the singular man, who seemed to await the
result of this debate, secure as a rattle-snake is of the prey which
has once felt its fascination. And while he said these words in deep
undertone, he withdrew his chair a little behind that of the Justice, so
as to be unseen by him or his clerk, who sat upon the same side; while
he bent on me a frown so portentous, that no one who has witnessed the
look can forget it during the whole of his life. The furrows of the
brow above the eyes became livid and almost black, and were bent into
a semicircular, or rather elliptical form, above the junction of the
eyebrows. I had heard such a look described in an old tale of DIABLERIE,
which it was my chance to be entertained with not long since; when
this deep and gloomy contortion of the frontal muscles was not unaptly
described as forming the representation of a small horseshoe.

The tale, when told, awaked a dreadful vision of infancy, which
the withering and blighting look now fixed on me again forced on
my recollection, but with much more vivacity. Indeed, I was so much
surprised, and, I must add, terrified, at the vague ideas which were
awakened in my mind by this fearful sign, that I kept my eyes fixed on
the face in which it was exhibited, as on a frightful vision; until,
passing his handkerchief a moment across his countenance, this
mysterious man relaxed at once the look which had for me something
so appalling. ‘The young man will no longer deny that he has seen me
before,’ said he to the Justice, in a tone of complacency; ‘and I trust
he will now be reconciled to my temporary guardianship, which may end
better for him than he expects.’

‘Whatever I expect,’ I replied, summoning my scattered recollections
together, ‘I see I am neither to expect justice nor protection from this
gentleman, whose office it is to render both to the lieges. For you,
sir, how strangely you have wrought yourself into the fate of an unhappy
young man or what interest you can pretend in me, you yourself only can
explain. That I have seen you before is certain; for none can forget the
look with which you seem to have the power of blighting those upon whom
you cast it.’

The Justice seemed not very easy under this hint, ‘Ha!--aye,’ he said;
‘it is time to be going, neighbour. I have a many miles to ride, and I
care not to ride darkling in these parts. You and I, Mr. Nicholas, must
be jogging.’

The Justice fumbled with his gloves, in endeavouring to draw them on
hastily, and Mr. Nicholas bustled to get his greatcoat and whip. Their
landlord endeavoured to detain them, and spoke of supper and beds. Both,
pouring forth many thanks for his invitation, seemed as if they would
much rather not, and Mr. Justice Foxley was making a score of apologies,
with at least a hundred cautionary hems and eh-ehs, when the girl Dorcas
burst into the room, and announced a gentleman on justice business.

‘What gentleman?--and whom does he want?’

‘He is cuome post on his ten toes,’ said the wench; ‘and on justice
business to his worship loike. I’se uphald him a gentleman, for he
speaks as good Latin as the schule-measter; but, lack-a-day! he has
gotten a queer mop of a wig.’

The gentleman, thus announced and described, bounced into the room.
But I have already written as much as fills a sheet of my paper, and my
singular embarrassments press so hard on me that I have matter to fill
another from what followed the intrusion of--my dear Alan--your crazy
client--Poor Peter Peebles!





LATIMER’S JOURNAL, IN CONTINUATION

Sheet 2.

I have rarely in my life, till the last alarming days, known what it
was to sustain a moment’s real sorrow. What I called such, was, I am
now well convinced, only the weariness of mind which, having nothing
actually present to complain of, turns upon itself and becomes anxious
about the past and the future; those periods with which human life has
so little connexion, that Scripture itself hath said, ‘Sufficient for
the day is the evil thereof.’

If, therefore, I have sometimes abused prosperity, by murmuring at
my unknown birth and uncertain rank in society, I will make amends by
bearing my present real adversity with patience and courage, and, if I
can, even with gaiety. What can they--dare they-do to me? Foxley, I am
persuaded, is a real Justice of Peace, and country gentleman of estate,
though (wonderful to tell!) he is an ass notwithstanding; and
his functionary in the drab coat must have a shrewd guess at the
consequences of being accessory to an act of murder or kidnapping. Men
invite not such witnesses to deeds of darkness. I have also--Alan, I
have hopes, arising out of the family of the oppressor himself. I am
encouraged to believe that G.M. is likely again to enter on the field.
More I dare not here say; nor must I drop a hint which another eye than
thine might be able to construe. Enough, my feelings are lighter than
they have been; and, though fear and wonder are still around me, they
are unable entirely to overcloud the horizon.

Even when I saw the spectral form of the old scarecrow of the Parliament
House rush into the apartment where I had undergone so singular an
examination, I thought of thy connexion with him, and could almost have
parodied Lear--

  Death!--nothing could have thus subdued nature
  To such a lowness, but his ‘learned lawyers.’

He was e’en as we have seen him of yore, Alan, when, rather to keep thee
company than to follow my own bent, I formerly frequented the halls of
justice. The only addition to his dress, in the capacity of a traveller,
was a pair of boots, that seemed as if they might have seen the field
of Sheriffmoor; so large and heavy that, tied as they were to the
creature’s wearied hams with large bunches of worsted tape of various
colours, they looked as if he had been dragging them along, either for a
wager or by way of penance.

Regardless of the surprised looks of the party on whom he thus intruded
himself, Peter blundered into the middle of the apartment, with his head
charged like a ram’s in the act of butting, and saluted them thus:--

‘Gude day to ye, gude day to your honours. Is’t here they sell the fugie
warrants?’

I observed that on his entrance, my friend--or enemy--drew himself
back, and placed himself as if he would rather avoid attracting the
observation of the new-comer. I did the same myself, as far as I was
able; for I thought it likely that Mr. Peebles might recognize me, as
indeed I was too frequently among the group of young juridical aspirants
who used to amuse themselves by putting cases for Peter’s solution, and
playing him worse tricks; yet I was uncertain whether I had better avail
myself of our acquaintance to have the advantage, such as it might
be, of his evidence before the magistrate, or whether to make him,
if possible, bearer of a letter which might procure me more effectual
assistance. I resolved, therefore, to be guided by circumstances, and
to watch carefully that nothing might escape me. I drew back as far as
I could, and even reconnoitred the door and passage, to consider whether
absolute escape might not be practicable. But there paraded Cristal
Nixon, whose little black eyes, sharp as those of a basilisk, seemed,
the instant when they encountered mine, to penetrate my purpose.

I sat down, as much out of sight of all parties as I could, and listened
to the dialogue which followed--a dialogue how much more interesting to
me than any I could have conceived, in which Peter Peebles was to be one
of the dramatis personae!

‘Is it here where ye sell the warrants--the fugies, ye ken?’ said Peter.

‘Hey--eh--what!’ said Justice Foxley; ‘what the devil does the fellow
mean?--What would you have a warrant for?’

‘It is to apprehend a young lawyer that is IN MEDITATIONE FUGAE; for he
has ta’en my memorial and pleaded my cause, and a good fee I gave
him, and as muckle brandy as he could drink that day at his father’s
house--he loes the brandy ower weel for sae youthful a creature.’

‘And what has this drunken young dog of a lawyer done to you, that
you are come to me--eh--ha? Has he robbed you? Not unlikely if he be a
lawyer--eh--Nick--ha?’ said Justice Foxley.

‘He has robbed me of himself, sir,’ answered Peter; ‘of his help,
comfort, aid, maintenance, and assistance, whilk, as a counsel to a
client, he is bound to yield me RATIONE OFFICII--that is it, ye see. He
has pouched my fee, and drucken a mutchkin of brandy, and now he’s ower
the march, and left my cause, half won half lost--as dead a heat as e’er
was run ower the back-sands. Now, I was advised by some cunning laddies
that are used to crack a bit law wi’ me in the House, that the best
thing I could do was to take heart o’ grace and set out after him; so I
have taken post on my ain shanks, forby a cast in a cart, or the like. I
got wind of him in Dumfries, and now I have run him ower to the English
side, and I want a fugie warrant against him.’

How did my heart throb at this information, dearest Alan! Thou art near
me then, and I well know with what kind purpose; thou hast abandoned all
to fly to my assistance; and no wonder that, knowing thy friendship and
faith, thy sound sagacity and persevering disposition, ‘my bosom’s
lord should now sit lightly on his throne’; that gaiety should almost
involuntarily hover on my pen; and that my heart should beat like that
of a general, responsive to the drums of his advancing ally, without
whose help the battle must have been lost.

I did not suffer myself to be startled by this joyous surprise, but
continued to bend my strictest attention to what followed among this
singular party. That Poor Peter Peebles had been put on this wildgoose
chase by some of his juvenile advisers in the Parliament House, he
himself had intimated; but he spoke with much confidence, and the
Justice, who seemed to have some secret apprehension of being put to
trouble in the matter, and, as sometimes occurs on the English frontier,
a jealousy lest the superior acuteness of their northern neighbours
might overreach their own simplicity, turned to his clerk with a
perplexed countenance.

‘Eh--oh--Nick--d--n thee--Hast thou got nothing to say? This is more
Scots law, I take it, and more Scotsmen.’ (Here he cast a side-glance at
the owner of the mansion, and winked to his clerk.) ‘I would Solway were
as deep as it is wide, and we had then some chance of keeping of them
out.’

Nicholas conversed an instant aside with the supplicant, and then
reported:--

‘The man wants a border-warrant, I think; but they are only granted for
debt--now he wants one to catch a lawyer.’

‘And what for no?’ answered Peter Peebles, doggedly; ‘what for no, I
would be glad to ken? If a day’s labourer refuse to work, ye’ll grant a
warrant to gar him do out his daurg--if a wench quean rin away from
her hairst, ye’ll send her back to her heuck again--if sae mickle as a
collier or a salter make a moonlight flitting, ye will cleek him by the
back-spaul in a minute of time--and yet the damage canna amount to mair
than a creelfu’ of coals, and a forpit or twa of saut; and here is a
chield taks leg from his engagement, and damages me to the tune of sax
thousand punds sterling; that is, three thousand that I should win, and
three thousand mair that I am like to lose; and you that ca’ yourself a
justice canna help a poor man to catch the rinaway? A bonny like justice
I am like to get amang ye!’

‘The fellow must be drunk,’ said the clerk.

‘Black fasting from all but sin,’ replied the supplicant; ‘I havena had
mair than a mouthful of cauld water since I passed the Border, and deil
a ane of ye is like to say to me, “Dog, will ye drink?”’

The Justice seemed moved by this appeal. ‘Hem---tush, man,’ replied he;
‘thou speak’st to us as if thou wert in presence of one of thine own
beggarly justices--get downstairs--get something to eat, man (with
permission of my friend to make so free in his house), and a mouthful to
drink, and I warrant we get ye such justice as will please ye.’

‘I winna refuse your neighbourly offer,’ said Poor Peter Peebles, making
his bow; ‘muckle grace be wi’ your honour, and wisdom to guide you in
this extraordinary cause.’

When I saw Peter Peebles about to retire from the room, I could not
forbear an effort to obtain from him such evidence as might give me some
credit with the Justice. I stepped forward, therefore, and, saluting
him, asked him if he remembered me?

After a stare or two, and a long pinch of snuff, recollection seemed
suddenly to dawn on Peter Peebles. ‘Recollect ye!’ he said; ‘by my troth
do I.---Haud him a grip, gentlemen!--constables, keep him fast! where
that ill-deedie hempy is, ye are sure that Alan Fairford is not far off.
Haud him fast, Master Constable; I charge ye wi’ him, for I am mista’en
if he is not at the bottom of this rinaway business. He was aye getting
the silly callant Alan awa wi’ gigs, and horse, and the like of that, to
Roslin, and Prestonpans, and a’ the idle gates he could think of. He’s a
rinaway apprentice, that ane.’

‘Mr. Peebles,’ I said, ‘do not do me wrong. I am sure you can say no
harm of me justly, but can satisfy these gentlemen, if you will, that I
am a student of law in Edinburgh--Darsie Latimer by name.’

‘Me satisfy! how can I satisfy the gentlemen,’ answered Peter, ‘that am
sae far from being satisfied mysell? I ken naething about your name, and
can only testify, NIHIL NOVIT IN CAUSA.’

‘A pretty witness you have brought forward in your favour,’ said Mr.
Foxley. ‘But--ha--aye---I’ll ask him a question or two. Pray, friend,
will you take your oath to this youth being a runaway apprentice?’

‘Sir,’ said Peter, ‘I will make oath to onything in reason; when a case
comes to my oath it’s a won cause: But I am in some haste to prie your
worship’s good cheer;’ for Peter had become much more respectful in
his demeanour towards the Justice since he had heard some intimation of
dinner.

‘You shall have--eh--hum--aye--a bellyful, if it be possible to fill it.
First let me know if this young man be really what he pretends. Nick,
make his affidavit.’

‘Ow, he is just a wud harum-scarum creature, that wad never take to his
studies; daft, sir, clean daft.’

‘Deft!’ said the Justice; ‘what d’ye mean by deft--eh?’

‘Just Fifish,’ replied Peter; ‘wowf--a wee bit by the East Nook or sae;
it’s a common case--the ae half of the warld thinks the tither daft. I
have met with folk in my day that thought I was daft mysell; and, for my
part, I think our Court of Session clean daft, that have had the great
cause of Peebles against Plainstanes before them for this score of
years, and have never been able to ding the bottom out of it yet.’

‘I cannot make out a word of his cursed brogue,’ said the Cumbrian
justice; ‘can you, neighbour--eh? What can he mean by DEFT?’

‘He means MAD,’ said the party appealed to, thrown off his guard by
impatience of this protracted discussion.

‘Ye have it--ye have it,’ said Peter; ‘that is, not clean skivie, but--’

Here he stopped, and fixed his eye on the person he addressed with an
air of joyful recognition.--‘Aye, aye, Mr. Herries of Birrenswork, is
this your ainsell in blood and bane? I thought ye had been hanged at
Kennington Common, or Hairiebie, or some of these places, after the
bonny ploy ye made in the Forty-five.’

‘I believe you are mistaken, friend,’ said Herries, sternly, with whose
name and designation I was thus made unexpectedly acquainted.

‘The deil a bit,’ answered the undaunted Peter Peebles; I mind ye weel,
for ye lodged in my house the great year of Forty-five, for a great
year it was; the Grand Rebellion broke out, and my cause--the great
cause--Peebles against Plainstanes, ET PER CONTRA--was called in the
beginning of the winter session, and would have been heard, but that
there was a surcease of justice, with your plaids, and your piping, and
your nonsense.’

‘I tell you, fellow,’ said Herries, yet more fiercely, ‘you have
confused me with some of the other furniture of your crazy pate.’

‘Speak like a gentleman, sir,’ answered Peebles; ‘these are not legal
phrases, Mr. Herries of Birrenswork. Speak in form of law, or I sall bid
ye gude day, sir. I have nae pleasure in speaking to proud folk, though
I am willing to answer onything in a legal way; so if you are for
a crack about auld langsyne, and the splores that you and Captain
Redgimlet used to breed in my house, and the girded cask of brandy that
ye drank and ne’er thought of paying for it (not that I minded it muckle
in thae days, though I have felt a lack of it sin syne), why I will
waste an hour on ye at ony time.--and where is Captain Redgimlet now?
he was a wild chap, like yoursell, though they arena sae keen after you
poor bodies for these some years bygane; the heading and hanging is weel
ower now--awful job--awful job--will ye try my sneeshing?’

He concluded his desultory speech by thrusting out his large bony paw,
filled with a Scottish mull of huge dimensions, which Herries, who had
been standing like one petrified by the assurance of this unexpected
address, rejected with a contemptuous motion of his hand, which spilled
some of the contents of the box.

‘Aweel, aweel,’ said Peter Peebles, totally unabashed by the repulse,
‘e’en as ye like, a wilful man maun hae his way; but,’ he added,
stooping down and endeavouring to gather the spilled snuff from the
polished floor, ‘I canna afford to lose my sneeshing for a’ that ye are
gumple-foisted wi’ me.’

My attention had been keenly awakened, during this extraordinary and
unexpected scene. I watched, with as much attention as my own agitation
permitted me to command, the effect produced on the parties concerned.
It was evident that our friend, Peter Peebles, had unwarily let out
something which altered the sentiments of Justice Foxley and his clerk
towards Mr. Herries, with whom, until he was known and acknowledged
under that name, they had appeared to be so intimate. They talked with
each other aside, looked at a paper or two which the clerk selected
from the contents of a huge black pocket-book, and seemed, under the
influence of fear and uncertainty, totally at a loss what line of
conduct to adopt.

Herries made a different, and far more interesting figure. However
little Peter Peebles might resemble the angel Ithuriel, the appearance
of Herries, his high and scornful demeanour, vexed at what seemed
detection yet fearless of the consequences, and regarding the whispering
magistrate and his clerk with looks in which contempt predominated over
anger or anxiety, bore, in my opinion, no slight resemblance to

     the regal port
  And faded splendour wan

with which the poet has invested the detected King of the powers of the
air.

As he glanced round, with a look which he had endeavoured to compose to
haughty indifference, his eye encountered mine, and, I thought, at
the first glance sank beneath it. But he instantly rallied his natural
spirit, and returned me one of those extraordinary looks, by which he
could contort so strangely the wrinkles on his forehead. I started; but,
angry at myself for my pusillanimity, I answered him by a look of the
same kind, and catching the reflection of my countenance in a large
antique mirror which stood before me, I started again at the real or
imaginary resemblance which my countenance, at that moment, bore to that
of Herries. Surely my fate is somehow strangely interwoven with that of
this mysterious individual. I had no time at present to speculate upon
the subject, for the subsequent conversation demanded all my attention.

The Justice addressed Herries, after a pause of about five minutes, in
which, all parties seemed at some loss how to proceed. He spoke with
embarrassment, and his faltering voice, and the long intervals which
divided his sentences, seemed to indicate fear of him whom he addressed.

‘Neighbour,’ he said, ‘I could not have thought this; or, if I--eh--DID
think--in a corner of my own mind as it were--that you, I say--that you
might have unluckily engaged in--eh--the matter of the Forty-five--there
was still time to have forgot all that.’

‘And is it so singular that a man should have been out in the
Forty-five?’ said Herries, with contemptuous composure;--‘your father, I
think, Mr. Foxley, was out with Derwentwater in the Fifteen.’

‘And lost half of his estate,’ answered Foxley, with more rapidity than
usual; ‘and was very near--hem--being hanged into the boot. But this
is--another guess job--for--eh--Fifteen is not Forty-five; and my father
had a remission, and you, I take it, have none.’

‘Perhaps I have,’ said Herries indifferently; ‘or if I have not, I am
but in the case of half a dozen others whom government do not think
worth looking after at this time of day, so they give no offence or
disturbance.’

‘But you have given both, sir,’ said Nicholas Faggot, the clerk, who,
having some petty provincial situation, as I have since understood,
deemed himself bound to be zealous for government, ‘Mr. Justice Foxley
cannot be answerable for letting you pass free, now your name and
surname have been spoken plainly out. There are warrants out against you
from the Secretary of State’s office.’

‘A proper allegation, Mr. Attorney! that, at the distance of so
many years, the Secretary of State should trouble himself about the
unfortunate relics of a ruined cause,’ answered Mr. Herries.

‘But if it be so,’ said the clerk, who seemed to assume more confidence
upon the composure of Herries’s demeanour; ‘and if cause has been given
by the conduct of a gentleman himself, who hath been, it is
alleged, raking up old matters, and mixing them with new subjects of
disaffection--I say, if it be so, I should advise the party, in his
wisdom, to surrender himself quietly into the lawful custody of the next
Justice of Peace--Mr. Foxley, suppose--where, and by whom, the matter
should be regularly inquired into. I am only putting a case,’ he added,
watching with apprehension the effect which his words were likely to
produce upon the party to whom they were addressed.

‘And were I to receive such advice,’ said Herries, with the same
composure as before--‘putting the case, as you say, Mr. Faggot--I
should request to see the warrant which countenanced such a scandalous
proceeding.’

Mr. Nicholas, by way of answer, placed in his hand a paper, and seemed
anxiously to expect the consequences which were to ensue. Mr. Herries
looked it over with the same equanimity as before, and then continued,
‘And were such a scrawl as this presented to me in my own house, I would
throw it into the chimney, and Mr. Faggot upon the top of it.’

Accordingly, seconding the word with the action, he flung the warrant
into the fire with one hand, and fixed the other, with a stern and
irresistible grip, on the breast of the attorney, who, totally unable to
contend with him, in either personal strength or mental energy, trembled
like a chicken in the raven’s clutch. He got off, however, for the
fright; for Herries, having probably made him fully sensible of the
strength of his grasp, released him, with a scornful laugh.

‘Deforcement--spulzie-stouthrief--masterful rescue!’ exclaimed Peter
Peebles, scandalized at the resistance offered to the law in the person
of Nicholas Faggot. But his shrill exclamations were drowned in the
thundering voice of Herries, who, calling upon Cristal Nixon, ordered
him to take the bawling fool downstairs, fill his belly, and then give
him a guinea, and thrust him out of doors. Under such injunctions, Peter
easily suffered himself to be withdrawn from the scene.

Herries then turned to the Justice, whose visage, wholly abandoned by
the rubicund hue which so lately beamed upon it, hung out the same pale
livery as that of his dismayed clerk. ‘Old friend and acquaintance,’
he said, ‘you came here at my request on a friendly errand, to convince
this silly young man of the right which I have over his person for the
present. I trust you do not intend to make your visit the pretext of
disquieting me about other matters? All the world knows that I have been
living at large, in these northern counties, for some months, not to say
years, and might have been apprehended at any time, had the necessities
of the state required, or my own behaviour deserved it. But no English
magistrate has been ungenerous enough to trouble a gentleman under
misfortune, on account of political opinions and disputes which have
been long ended by the success of the reigning powers. I trust, my good
friend, you will not endanger yourself by taking any other view of the
subject than you have done ever since we were acquainted?’

The Justice answered with more readiness, as well as more spirit than
usual, ‘Neighbour Ingoldsby--what you say--is--eh--in some sort
true; and when you were coming and going at markets, horse-races,
and cock-fights, fairs, hunts, and such-like--it was--eh--neither my
business nor my wish to dispel--I say--to inquire into and dispel the
mysteries which hung about you; for while you were a good companion
in the field, and over a bottle now and then--I did not--eh--think
it necessary to ask--into your private affairs. And if I thought
you were--ahem--somewhat unfortunate in former undertakings, and
enterprises, and connexions, which might cause you to live unsettledly
and more private, I could have--eh--very little pleasure--to aggravate
your case by interfering, or requiring explanations, which are often
more easily asked than given. But when there are warrants and witnesses
to names--and those names, christian and surname, belong to--eh--an
attainted person--charged--I trust falsely--with--ahem-taking advantage
of modern broils and heart-burnings to renew our civil disturbances, the
case is altered; and I must--ahem--do my duty.’

The Justice, got on his feet as he concluded this speech, and looked
as bold as he could. I drew close beside him and his clerk, Mr. Faggot,
thinking the moment favourable for my own liberation, and intimated
to Mr. Foxley my determination to stand by him. But Mr. Herries only
laughed at the menacing posture which we assumed. ‘My good neighbour,’
said he, ‘you talk of a witness. Is yon crazy beggar a fit witness in an
affair of this nature?’

‘But you do not deny that you are Mr. Herries of Birrenswork, mentioned
in the Secretary of State’s warrant?’ said Mr. Foxley.

‘How can I deny or own anything about it?’ said Herries, with a sneer.
‘There is no such warrant in existence now; its ashes, like the poor
traitor whose doom it threatened, have been dispersed to the four winds
of heaven. There is now no warrant in the world.’

‘But you will not deny,’ said the Justice, ‘that you were the person
named in it; and that--eh--your own act destroyed it?’

‘I will neither deny my name nor my actions, Justice,’ replied Mr.
Herries, ‘when called upon by competent authority to avow or defend
them. But I will resist all impertinent attempts either to intrude into
my private motives, or to control my person. I am quite well prepared to
do so; and I trust that you, my good neighbour and brother sportsman,
in your expostulation, and my friend Mr. Nicholas Faggot here, in his
humble advice and petition that I should surrender myself, will consider
yourselves as having amply discharged your duty to King George and
government.’

The cold and ironical tone in which he made this declaration; the look
and attitude, so nobly expressive of absolute confidence in his own
superior strength and energy, seemed to complete the indecision which
had already shown itself on the side of those whom he addressed.

The Justice looked to the clerk--the clerk to the Justice; the former
HA’D, EH’D, without bringing forth an articulate syllable; the latter
only said, ‘As the warrant is destroyed, Mr. Justice, I presume you do
not mean to proceed with the arrest?’

‘Hum--aye--why, no--Nicholas--it would not be quite advisable--and as
the Forty-five was an old affair--and--hem--as my friend here will,
I hope, see his error--that is, if he has not seen it already--and
renounce the Pope, the Devil, and the Pretender--I mean no harm,
neighbour--I think we--as we have no POSSE, or constables, or the
like--should order our horses--and, in one word, look the matter over.’

‘Judiciously resolved,’ said the person whom this decision affected;
‘but before you go, I trust you will drink and be friends?’

‘Why,’ said the Justice, rubbing his brow, ‘our business has
been--hem--rather a thirsty one.’

‘Cristal Nixon,’ said Mr. Herries, ‘let us have a cool tankard
instantly, large enough to quench the thirst of the whole commission.’

While Cristal was absent on this genial errand, there was a pause, of
which I endeavoured to avail myself by bringing back the discourse to
my own concerns. ‘Sir,’ I said to Justice Foxley, ‘I have no direct
business with your late discussion with Mr. Herries, only just thus
far--You leave me, a loyal subject of King George, an unwilling prisoner
in the hands of a person whom you have reason to believe unfriendly to
the king’s cause. I humbly submit that this is contrary to your duty
as a magistrate, and that you ought to make Mr. Herries aware of the
illegality of his proceedings, and take steps for my rescue, either upon
the spot, or, at least, as soon as possible after you have left this
case’--

‘Young man,’ said Mr. Justice Foxley, ‘I would have you remember you are
under the power, the lawful power--ahem--of your guardian.’

‘He calls himself so, indeed,’ I replied; ‘but he has shown no evidence
to establish so absurd a claim; and if he had, his circumstances, as an
attainted traitor excepted from pardon, would void such a right if it
existed. I do therefore desire you, Mr. Justice, and you, his clerk, to
consider my situation, and afford me relief at your peril.’

‘Here is a young fellow now,’ said the Justice, with much-embarrassed
looks, ‘thinks that I carry the whole statute law of England in my head,
and a POSSE COMITATUS to execute them in my pocket! Why, what good would
my interference do?--but--hum--eh--I will speak to your guardian in your
favour.’

He took Mr. Herries aside, and seemed indeed to urge something upon him
with much earnestness; and perhaps such a species of intercession was
all which, in the circumstances, I was entitled to expect from him.

They often looked at me as they spoke together; and as Cristal Nixon
entered with a huge four-pottle tankard, filled with the beverage
his master had demanded, Herries turned away from Mr. Foxley somewhat
impatiently, saying with emphasis, ‘I give you my word of honour, that
you have not the slightest reason to apprehend anything on his account.’
He then took up the tankard, and saying aloud in Gaelic, ‘SLAINT AN
REY,’ [The King’s health.] just tasted the liquor, and handed the
tankard to Justice Foxley, who, to avoid the dilemma of pledging him to
what might be the Pretender’s health, drank to Mr. Herries’s own, with
much pointed solemnity, but in a draught far less moderate.

The clerk imitated the example of his principal, and I was fain to
follow their example, for anxiety and fear are at least as thirsty as
sorrow is said to be. In a word, we exhausted the composition of ale,
sherry, lemon-juice, nutmeg, and other good things, stranded upon the
silver bottom of the tankard the huge toast, as well as the roasted
orange, which had whilom floated jollily upon the brim, and rendered
legible Dr. Byrom’s celebrated lines engraved thereon--

  God bless the King!--God bless the Faith’s defender!
  God bless--No harm in blessing--the Pretender.
  Who that Pretender is, and who that King,--
  God bless us all!--is quite another thing.

I had time enough to study this effusion of the Jacobite muse, while the
Justice was engaged in the somewhat tedious ceremony of taking leave.
That of Mr. Faggot was less ceremonious; but I suspect something besides
empty compliment passed betwixt him and Mr. Herries; for I remarked that
the latter slipped a piece of paper into the hand of the former, which
might perhaps be a little atonement for the rashness with which he had
burnt the warrant, and imposed no gentle hand on the respectable minion
of the law by whom it was exhibited; and I observed that he made this
propitiation in such a manner as to be secret from the worthy clerk’s
principal.

When this was arranged, the party took leave of each other with much
formality on the part of Squire Foxley, amongst whose adieus the
following phrase was chiefly remarkable: ‘I presume you do not intend to
stay long in these parts?’

‘Not for the present, Justice, you may be sure; there are good reasons
to the contrary. But I have no doubt of arranging my affairs so that we
shall speedily have sport together again.’

He went to wait upon the Justice to the courtyard; and, as he did
so, commanded Cristal Nixon to see that I returned into my apartment.
Knowing it would be to no purpose to resist or tamper with that stubborn
functionary, I obeyed in silence, and was once more a prisoner in my
former quarters.





LATIMER’S JOURNAL, IN CONTINUATION

I spent more than an hour, after returning to the apartment which I may
call my prison, in reducing to writing the singular circumstances which
I had just witnessed. Methought I could now form some guess at the
character of Mr. Herries, upon whose name and situation the late
scene had thrown considerable light--one of those fanatical Jacobites,
doubtless, whose arms, not twenty years since, had shaken the British
throne, and some of whom, though their party daily diminished in
numbers, energy, and power, retained still an inclination to renew the
attempt they had found so desperate. He was indeed perfectly different
from the sort of zealous Jacobites whom it had been my luck hitherto to
meet with. Old ladies of family over their hyson, and grey-haired lairds
over their punch, I had often heard utter a little harmless treason;
while the former remembered having led down a dance with the Chevalier,
and the latter recounted the feats they had performed at Preston,
Clifton, and Falkirk.

The disaffection of such persons was too unimportant to excite the
attention of government. I had heard, however, that there still
existed partisans of the Stuart family of a more daring and dangerous
description; men who, furnished with gold from Rome, moved, secretly and
in disguise, through the various classes of society, and endeavoured to
keep alive the expiring zeal of their party.

I had no difficulty in assigning an important post among this class of
persons, whose agency and exertion are only doubted by those who look
on the surface of things, to this Mr. Herries, whose mental energies, as
well as his personal strength and activity, seemed to qualify him
well to act so dangerous a part; and I knew that all along the Western
Border, both in England and Scotland, there are so many nonjurors, that
such a person may reside there with absolute safety, unless it becomes,
in a very especial degree, the object of the government to secure his
person; and which purpose, even then, might be disappointed by early
intelligence, or, as in the case of Mr. Foxley, by the unwillingness
of provincial magistrates to interfere in what is now considered an
invidious pursuit of the unfortunate.

There have, however, been rumours lately, as if the present state of the
nation or at least of some discontented provinces, agitated by a
variety of causes but particularly by the unpopularity of the present
administration, may seem to this species of agitators a favourable
period for recommencing their intrigues; while, on the other hand,
government may not, at such a crisis, be inclined to look upon them
with the contempt which a few years ago would have been their most
appropriate punishment.

That men should be found rash enough to throw away their services and
lives in a desperate cause, is nothing new in history, which abounds
with instances of similar devotion--that Mr. Herries is such an
enthusiast is no less evident; but all this explains not his conduct
towards me. Had he sought to make me a proselyte to his ruined cause,
violence and compulsion were arguments very unlikely to prevail with any
generous spirit. But even if such were his object, of what use to him
could be the acquisition of a single reluctant partisan, who could bring
only his own person to support any quarrel which he might adopt? He had
claimed over me the rights of a guardian; he had more than hinted that
I was in a state of mind which could not dispense with the authority of
such a person. Was this man, so sternly desperate in his purpose--he
who seemed willing to take on his own shoulders the entire support of
a cause which had been ruinous to thousands--was he the person that had
the power of deciding on my fate? Was it from him those dangers flowed,
to secure me against which I had been educated under such circumstances
of secrecy and precaution?

And if this was so, of what nature was the claim which he asserted?--Was
it that of propinquity? And did I share the blood, perhaps the features,
of this singular being?--Strange as it may seem, a thrill of awe, which
shot across my mind at that instant, was not unmingled with a wild and
mysterious feeling of wonder, almost amounting to pleasure. I remembered
the reflection of my own face in the mirror at one striking moment
during the singular interview of the day, and I hastened to the outward
apartment to consult a glass which hung there, whether it were possible
for my countenance to be again contorted into the peculiar frown which
so much resembled the terrific look of Herries. But I folded my brows
in vain into a thousand complicated wrinkles, and I was obliged to
conclude, either that the supposed mark on my brow was altogether
imaginary, or that it could not be called forth by voluntary effort; or,
in fine, what seemed most likely, that it was such a resemblance as the
imagination traces in the embers of a wood fire, or among the varied
veins of marble, distinct at one time, and obscure or invisible at
another, according as the combination of lines strikes the eye or
impresses the fancy.

While I was moulding my visage like a mad player, the door suddenly
opened, and the girl of the house entered. Angry and ashamed at being
detected in my singular occupation, I turned round sharply, and, I
suppose, chance produced the change on my features which I had been in
vain labouring to call forth.

The girl started back, with her ‘Don’t ya look so now--don’t ye, for
love’s sake--you be as like the ould squoire as--But here a comes,’ she
said, huddling away out of the room; ‘and if you want a third, there is
none but ould Harry, as I know of, that can match ye for a brent broo!’

As the girl muttered this exclamation, and hastened out of the room,
Herries entered. He stopped on observing that I had looked again to the
mirror, anxious to trace the look by which the wench had undoubtedly
been terrified. He seemed to guess what was passing in my mind, for, as
I turned towards him, he observed, ‘Doubt not that it is stamped on your
forehead--the fatal mark of our race; though it is not now so apparent
as it will become when age and sorrow, and the traces of stormy passions
and of bitter penitence, shall have drawn their furrows on your brow.’

‘Mysterious man,’ I replied, ‘I know not of what you speak; your
language is as dark as your purposes!’

‘Sit down, then,’ he said, ‘and listen; thus far, at least, must the
veil of which you complain be raised. When withdrawn, it will only
display guilt and sorrow--guilt followed by strange penalty, and sorrow
which Providence has entailed upon the posterity of the mourners.’

He paused a moment, and commenced his narrative, which he told with the
air of one, who, remote as the events were which he recited, took
still the deepest interest in them. The tone of his voice, which I have
already described as rich and powerful, aided by its inflections the
effects of his story, which I will endeavour to write down, as nearly as
possible, in the very words which he used.

‘It was not of late years that the English learned that their best
chance of conquering their independent neighbours must be by introducing
amongst them division and civil war. You need not be reminded of the
state of thraldom to which Scotland was reduced by the unhappy wars
betwixt the domestic factions of Bruce and Baliol, nor how, after
Scotland had been emancipated from a foreign yoke by the conduct and
valour of the immortal Bruce, the whole fruits of the triumphs of
Bannockburn were lost in the dreadful defeats of Dupplin and Halidon;
and Edward Baliol, the minion and feudatory of his namesake of England,
seemed, for a brief season, in safe and uncontested possession of the
throne so lately occupied by the greatest general and wisest prince in
Europe. But the experience of Bruce had not died with him. There
were many who had shared his martial labours, and all remembered the
successful efforts by which, under circumstances as disadvantageous as
those of his son, he had achieved the liberation of Scotland.

‘The usurper, Edward Baliol, was feasting with a few of his favourite
retainers in the castle of Annan, when he was suddenly surprised by a
chosen band of insurgent patriots. Their chiefs were, Douglas, Randolph,
the young Earl of Moray, and Sir Simon Fraser; and their success was so
complete, that Baliol was obliged to fly for his life scarcely
clothed, and on a horse which there was no leisure to saddle. It was of
importance to seize his person, if possible, and his flight was closely
pursued by a valiant knight of Norman descent, whose family had been
long settled in the marches of Dumfriesshire. Their Norman appellation
was Fitz-Aldin, but this knight, from the great slaughter which he had
made of the Southron, and the reluctance which he had shown to admit
them to quarter during the former war of that bloody period, had
acquired the name of Redgauntlet, which he transmitted to his
posterity’--

‘Redgauntlet!’ I involuntarily repeated.

‘Yes, Redgauntlet,’ said my alleged guardian, looking at me keenly;
‘does that name recall any associations to your mind?’

‘No,’ I replied, ‘except that I had lately heard it given to the hero of
a supernatural legend.’

‘There are many such current concerning the family,’ he answered; and
then proceeded in his narrative.

‘Alberick Redgauntlet, the first of his house so termed, was, as may be
supposed from his name, of a stern and implacable disposition, which
had been rendered more so by family discord. An only son, now a youth
of eighteen, shared so much the haughty spirit of his father, that he
became impatient of domestic control, resisted paternal authority, and
finally fled from his father’s house, renounced his political opinions,
and awakened his mortal displeasure by joining the adherents of Baliol.
It was said that his father cursed, in his wrath, his degenerate
offspring, and swore that if they met he should perish by his hand.
Meantime, circumstances seemed to promise atonement for this great
deprivation. The lady of Alberick Redgauntlet was again, after many
years, in a situation which afforded her husband the hope of a more
dutiful heir.

‘But the delicacy and deep interest of his wife’s condition did not
prevent Alberick from engaging in the undertaking of Douglas and Moray.
He had been the most forward in the attack of the castle, and was now
foremost in the pursuit of Baliol, eagerly engaged in dispersing or
cutting down the few daring followers who endeavoured to protect the
usurper in his flight.

‘As these were successively routed or slain, the formidable Redgauntlet,
the mortal enemy of the House of Baliol, was within two lances’ length
of the fugitive Edward Baliol, in a narrow pass, when a youth, one of
the last who attended the usurper in his flight, threw himself
between them, received the shock of the pursuer, and was unhorsed and
overthrown. The helmet rolled from his head, and the beams of the sun,
then rising over the Solway, showed Redgauntlet the features of his
disobedient son, in the livery, and wearing the cognizance, of the
usurper.

‘Redgauntlet beheld his son lying before his horse’s feet; but he also
saw Baliol, the usurper of the Scottish crown, still, as it seemed,
within his grasp, and separated from him only by the prostrate body of
his overthrown adherent. Without pausing to inquire whether young Edward
was wounded, he dashed his spurs into his horse, meaning to leap over
him, but was unhappily frustrated in his purpose. The steed made indeed
a bound forward, but was unable to clear the body of the youth, and
with its hind foot struck him in the forehead, as he was in the act of
rising. The blow was mortal. It is needless to add, that the pursuit was
checked, and Baliol escaped.

‘Redgauntlet, ferocious as he is described, was yet overwhelmed with the
thoughts of the crime he had committed. When he returned to his castle,
it was to encounter new domestic sorrows. His wife had been prematurely
seized with the pangs of labour upon hearing the dreadful catastrophe
which had taken place. The birth of an infant boy cost her her life.
Redgauntlet sat by her corpse for more than twenty-four hours without
changing either feature or posture, so far as his terrified domestics
could observe. The Abbot of Dundrennan preached consolation to him in
vain. Douglas, who came to visit in his affliction a patriot of such
distinguished zeal, was more successful in rousing his attention. He
caused the trumpets to sound an English point of war in the courtyard,
and Redgauntlet at once sprang to his arms, and seemed restored to the
recollection which had been lost in the extent of his misery.

‘From that moment, whatever he might feel inwardly, he gave way to no
outward emotion. Douglas caused his infant to be brought; but even the
iron-hearted soldiers were struck with horror to observe that, by the
mysterious law of nature, the cause of his mother’s death, and the
evidence of his father’s guilt, was stamped on the innocent face of the
babe, whose brow was distinctly marked by the miniature resemblance of a
horseshoe. Redgauntlet himself pointed it out to Douglas, saying, with a
ghastly smile, “It should have been bloody.”

‘Moved, as he was, to compassion for his brother-in-arms, and steeled
against all softer feelings by the habits of civil war, Douglas
shuddered at this sight, and displayed a desire to leave the house which
was doomed to be the scene of such horrors. As his parting advice, he
exhorted Alberick Redgauntlet to make a pilgrimage to Saint Ninian’s of
Whiteherne, then esteemed a shrine of great sanctity; and departed with
a precipitation which might have aggravated, had that been possible,
the forlorn state of his unhappy friend. But that seems to have been
incapable of admitting any addition. Sir Alberick caused the bodies
of his slaughtered son and the mother to be laid side by side in the
ancient chapel of his house, after he had used the skill of a celebrated
surgeon of that time to embalm them; and it was said that for many weeks
he spent; some hours nightly in the vault where they reposed.

‘At length he undertook the proposed pilgrimage to Whiteherne, where
he confessed himself for the first time since his misfortune, and was
shrived by an aged monk, who afterwards died in the odour of sanctity.
It is said that it was then foretold to the Redgauntlet, that on account
of his unshaken patriotism his family should continue to be powerful
amid the changes of future times; but that, in detestation of his
unrelenting cruelty to his own issue, Heaven had decreed that the valour
of his race should always be fruitless, and that the cause which they
espoused should never prosper.

‘Submitting to such penance as was there imposed, Sir Alberick went,
it is thought, on a pilgrimage either to Rome, or to the Holy Sepulchre
itself. He was universally considered as dead; and it was not till
thirteen years afterwards, that in the great battle of Durham, fought
between David Bruce and Queen Philippa of England, a knight, bearing
a horseshoe for his crest, appeared in the van of the Scottish army,
distinguishing himself by his reckless and desperate valour; who being
at length overpowered and slain, was finally discovered to be the brave
and unhappy Sir Alberick Redgauntlet.’

‘And has the fatal sign,’ said I, when Herries had ended his narrative,
‘descended on all the posterity of this unhappy house?’

‘It has been so handed down from antiquity, and is still believed,’ said
Herries. ‘But perhaps there is, in the popular evidence, something of
that fancy which creates what it sees. Certainly, as other families have
peculiarities by which they are distinguished, this of Redgauntlet is
marked in most individuals by a singular indenture of the forehead,
supposed to be derived from the son of Alberick, their ancestor, and
brother to the unfortunate Edward, who had perished in so piteous a
manner. It is certain there seems to have been a fate upon the House of
Redgauntlet, which has been on the losing side in almost all the civil
broils which have divided the kingdom of Scotland from David Bruce’s
days, till the late valiant and unsuccessful attempt of the Chevalier
Charles Edward.’

He concluded with a deep sigh, as one whom the subject had involved in a
train of painful reflections.

‘And am I then,’ I exclaimed, ‘descended from this unhappy race? Do you
belong to it? And if so, why do I sustain restraint and hard usage at
the hands of a relation?’

‘Inquire no further for the present,’ he said. ‘The line of conduct
which I am pursuing towards you is dictated, not by choice but by
necessity. You were withdrawn from the bosom of your family and the
care of your legal guardian, by the timidity and ignorance of a doting
mother, who was incapable of estimating the arguments or feelings of
those who prefer honour and principle to fortune, and even to life. The
young hawk, accustomed only to the fostering care of its dam, must be
tamed by darkness and sleeplessness, ere it is trusted on the wing for
the purposes of the falconer.’

I was appalled at this declaration, which seemed to threaten a long
continuance, and a dangerous termination, of my captivity. I deemed it
best, however, to show some spirit, and at the same time to mingle a
tone of conciliation. ‘Mr. Herries,’ I said ‘(if I call you rightly by
that name), let us speak upon this matter without the tone of mystery
and fear in which you seem inclined to envelop it. I have been long,
alas! deprived of the care of that affectionate mother to whom you
allude--long under the charge of strangers--and compelled to form my
own resolutions upon the reasoning of my own mind. Misfortune--early
deprivation--has given me the privilege of acting for myself; and
constraint shall not deprive me of an Englishman’s best privilege.’

‘The true cant of the day,’ said Herries, in a tone of scorn. ‘The
privilege of free action belongs to no mortal--we are tied down by
the fetters of duty--our mortal path is limited by the regulations
of honour--our most indifferent actions are but meshes of the web of
destiny by which we are all surrounded.’

He paced the room rapidly, and proceeded in a tone of enthusiasm
which, joined to some other parts of his conduct, seems to intimate an
over-excited imagination, were it not contradicted by the general tenor
of his speech and conduct.

‘Nothing,’ he said, in an earnest yet melancholy voice--‘nothing is the
work of chance--nothing is the consequence of free-will--the liberty of
which the Englishman boasts gives as little real freedom to its owner as
the despotism, of an Eastern sultan permits to his slave. The usurper,
William of Nassau, went forth to hunt, and thought, doubtless, that it
was by an act of his own royal pleasure that the horse of his murdered
victim was prepared for his kingly sport. But Heaven had other views;
and before the sun was high, a stumble of that very animal over an
obstacle so inconsiderable as a mole-hillock, cost the haughty rider
his life and his usurped crown, Do you think an inclination of the rein
could have avoided that trifling impediment? I tell you, it crossed his
way as inevitably as all the long chain of Caucasus could have done.
Yes, young man, in doing and suffering, we play but the part allotted by
Destiny, the manager of this strange drama, stand bound to act no more
than is prescribed, to say no more than is set down for us; and yet we
mouth about free-will and freedom of thought and action, as if Richard
must not die, or Richmond conquer, exactly where the Author has decreed
it shall be so!’

He continued to pace the room after this speech, with folded arms and
downcast looks; and the sound of his steps and tone of his voice brought
to my remembrance, that I had heard this singular person, when I met him
on a former occasion, uttering such soliloquies in his solitary chamber.
I observed that, like other Jacobites, in his inveteracy against the
memory of King William, he had adopted the party opinion, that the
monarch, on the day he had his fatal accident, rode upon a horse once
the property of the unfortunate Sir John Friend, executed for high
treason in 1698.

It was not my business to aggravate, but, if possible, rather to soothe
him in whose power I was so singularly placed. When I conceived that the
keenness of his feelings had in some degree subsided, I answered him
as follows:--‘I will not--indeed I feel myself incompetent to argue
a question of such metaphysical subtlety, as that which involves the
limits betwixt free-will and predestination. Let us hope we may live
honestly and die hopefully, without being obliged to form a decided
opinion upon a point so far beyond our comprehension.’

‘Wisely resolved,’ he interrupted, with a sneer--‘there came a note from
some Geneva, sermon.’

‘But,’ I proceeded, ‘I call your attention to the fact that I, as well
as you, am acted upon by impulses, the result either of my own free
will, or the consequences of the part which is assigned to me by
destiny. These may be--nay, at present they are--in direct contradiction
to those by which you are actuated; and how shall we decide which
shall have precedence?--YOU perhaps feel yourself destined to act as my
jailer. I feel myself, on the contrary, destined to attempt and effect
my escape. One of us must be wrong, but who can say which errs till the
event has decided betwixt us?’

‘I shall feel myself destined to have recourse to severe modes of
restraint,’ said he, in the same tone of half jest, half earnest which I
had used.

‘In that case,’ I answered, ‘it will be my destiny to attempt everything
for my freedom.’

‘And it may be mine, young man,’ he replied, in a deep and stern tone,
‘to take care that you should rather die than attain your purpose.’

This was speaking out indeed, and I did not allow him to go unanswered.
‘You threaten me in vain,’ said I; ‘the laws of my country will protect
me; or whom they cannot protect, they will avenge.’

I spoke this firmly, and he seemed for a moment silenced; and the scorn
with which he at last answered me, had something of affectation in it.

‘The laws!’ he said; ‘and what, stripling, do you know of the laws of
your country? Could you learn jurisprudence under a base-born blotter
of parchment, such as Saunders Fairford; or from the empty pedantic
coxcomb, his son, who now, forsooth, writer himself advocate? When
Scotland was herself, and had her own king and legislature, such
plebeian cubs, instead of being called to the bar of her supreme courts,
would scarce have been admitted to the honour of bearing a sheepskin
process-bag.’

Alan, I could not bear this, but answered indignantly, that he knew not
the worth and honour from which he was detracting.

‘I know as much of these Fairfords as I do of you,’ he replied.

‘As much,’ said I, ‘and as little; for you can neither estimate their
real worth nor mine. I know you saw them when last in Edinburgh.’

‘Ha!’ he exclaimed, and turned on me an inquisitive look.

‘It is true,’ said I; ‘you cannot deny it; and having thus shown you
that I know something of your motions, let me warn you I have modes of
communication with which you are not acquainted. Oblige me not to use
them to your prejudice.’

‘Prejudice me!’ he replied. ‘Young man, I smile at, and forgive your
folly. Nay, I will tell you that of which you are not aware, namely,
that it was from letters received from these Fairfords that I first
suspected, what the result of my visit to them confirmed, that you were
the person whom I had sought for years.’

‘If you learned this,’ said I, ‘from the papers which were about my
person on the night when I was under the necessity of becoming your
guest at Brokenburn, I do not envy your indifference to the means of
acquiring information. It was dishonourable to’--

‘Peace, young man,’ said Herries, more calmly than I might have
expected; ‘the word dishonour must not be mentioned as in conjunction
with my name. Your pocket-book was in the pocket of your coat, and did
not escape the curiosity of another, though it would have been sacred
from mine, My servant, Cristal Nixon, brought me the intelligence after
you were gone. I was displeased with the manner in which he had acquired
his information; but it was not the less my duty to ascertain its truth,
and for that purpose I went to Edinburgh. I was in hopes to persuade
Mr. Fairford to have entered into my views; but I found him too much
prejudiced to permit me to trust him. He is a wretched, yet a timid
slave of the present government, under which our unhappy country is
dishonourably enthralled; and it would have been altogether unfit and
unsafe to have entrusted him with the secret either of the right which
I possess to direct your actions, or of the manner in which I purpose to
exercise it.’

I was determined to take advantage of his communicative humour, and
obtain, if possible, more light upon his purpose. He seemed most
accessible to being piqued on the point of honour, and I resolved to
avail myself, but with caution, of his sensibility upon that topic. ‘You
say,’ I replied, ‘that you are not friendly to indirect practices, and
disapprove of the means by which your domestic obtained information
of my name and quality--Is it honourable to avail yourself of that
knowledge which is dishonourably obtained?’

‘It is boldly asked,’ he replied; ‘but, within certain necessary
limits, I dislike not boldness of expostulation. You have, in this short
conference, displayed more character and energy than I was prepared to
expect. You will, I trust, resemble a forest plant, which has indeed,
by some accident, been brought up in the greenhouse, and thus rendered
delicate and effeminate, but which regains its native firmness and
tenacity when exposed for a season to the winter air. I will answer
your question plainly. In business, as in war, spies and informers are
necessary evils, which all good men detest; but which yet all prudent
men must use, unless they mean to fight and act blindfold. But nothing
can justify the use of falsehood and treachery in our own person.’

‘You said to the elder Mr. Fairford,’ continued I, with the same
boldness, which I began to find was my best game, ‘that I was the son of
Ralph Latimer of Langcote Hall? How do you reconcile this with your late
assertion that my name is not Latimer?’

He coloured as he replied, ‘The doting old fool lied; or perhaps mistook
my meaning. I said, that gentleman might be your father. To say truth,
I wished you to visit England, your native country; because, when you
might do so, my rights over you would revive.’

This speech fully led me to understand a caution which had been often
impressed upon me, that, if I regarded my safety, I should not cross
the southern Border; and I cursed my own folly, which kept me fluttering
like a moth around the candle, until I was betrayed into the calamity
with which I had dallied. ‘What are those rights,’ I said, ‘which you
claim over me? To what end do you propose to turn them?’

‘To a weighty one, you may be certain,’ answered Mr. Herries; ‘but I do
not, at present, mean to communicate to you either its nature or extent.
You may judge of its importance, when, in order entirely to possess
myself of your person, I condescended to mix myself with the fellows who
destroyed the fishing station of yon wretched Quaker. That I held him in
contempt, and was displeased at the greedy devices with which he ruined
a manly sport, is true enough; but, unless as it favoured my designs on
you, he might have, for me, maintained his stake-nets till Solway should
cease to ebb and flow.’

‘Alas!’ I said, ‘it doubles my regret to have been the unwilling cause
of misfortune to an honest and friendly man.’

‘Do not grieve for that,’ said Herries; ‘honest Joshua is one of
those who, by dint of long prayers, can possess themselves of widow’s
houses--he will quickly repair his losses. When he sustains any mishap,
he and the other canters set it down as a debt against Heaven, and, by
way of set-off, practise rogueries without compunction, till the they
make the balance even, or incline it to the winning side. Enough of this
for the present.--I must immediately shift my quarters; for, although I
do not fear the over-zeal of Mr. Justice Foxley or his clerk will
lead them to any extreme measure, yet that mad scoundrel’s unhappy
recognition of me may make it more serious for them to connive at me,
and I must not put their patience to an over severe trial. You must
prepare to attend me, either as a captive or a companion; if as the
latter, you must give your parole of honour to attempt no escape. Should
you be so ill advised as to break your word once pledged, be assured
that I will blow your brains out without a moment’s scruple.’

‘I am ignorant of your plans and purposes,’ I replied, ‘and cannot but
hold them dangerous. I do not mean to aggravate my present situation by
any unavailing resistance to the superior force which detains me; but
I will not renounce the right of asserting my natural freedom should it
favourable opportunity occur. I will, therefore, rather be your prisoner
than your confederate.’

‘That is spoken fairly,’ he said; ‘and yet not without the canny caution
of one brought up in the Gude Town of Edinburgh. On my part, I will
impose no unnecessary hardship upon you; but, on the contrary, your
journey shall be made as easy as is consistent with your being kept
safely. Do you feel strong enough to ride on horseback as yet, or would
you prefer a carriage? The former mode of travelling is best adapted to
the country through which we are to travel, but you are at liberty to
choose between them.’

I said, ‘I felt my strength gradually returning, and that I should much
prefer travelling on horseback. A carriage,’ I added, ‘is so close’--

‘And so easily guarded,’ replied Herries, with a look as if he would
have penetrated my very thoughts,--‘that, doubtless, you think horseback
better calculated for an escape.’

‘My thoughts are my own,’ I answered; ‘and though you keep my person
prisoner, these are beyond your control.’

‘Oh, I can read the book,’ he said, ‘without opening the leaves. But I
would recommend to you to make no rash attempt, and it will be my
care to see that you have no power to make any that is likely to
be effectual. Linen, and all other necessaries for one in your
circumstances, are amply provided, Cristal Nixon will act as your
valet,--I should rather, perhaps, say, your FEMME DE CHAMBRE. Your
travelling dress you may perhaps consider as singular; but it is such
as the circumstances require; and, if you object to use the articles
prepared for your use, your mode of journeying will be as personally
unpleasant as that which conducted you hither.--Adieu--We now know each
other better than we did--it will not be my fault if the consequences of
further intimacy be not a more favourable mutual opinion.’

He then left me, with a civil good night, to my own reflections,
and only turned back to say that we should proceed on our journey
at daybreak next morning, at furthest; perhaps earlier, he said; but
complimented me by supposing that, as I was a sportsman, I must always
be ready for a sudden start.

We are then at issue, this singular man and myself. His personal views
are to a certain point explained. He has chosen an antiquated and
desperate line of politics, and he claims, from some pretended tie of
guardianship or relationship, which he does not deign to explain but
which he seems to have been able to pass current on a silly country
Justice and his knavish clerk, a right to direct and to control my
motions. The danger which awaited me in England, and which I might have
escaped had I remained in Scotland, was doubtless occasioned by the
authority of this man. But what my poor mother might fear for me as a
child--what my English friend, Samuel Griffiths, endeavoured to guard
against during my youth and nonage, is now, it seems, come upon me;
and, under a legal pretext, I am detained in what must be a most illegal
manner, by a person, foe, whose own political immunities have been
forfeited by his conduct. It matters not--my mind is made up neither
persuasion nor threats shall force me into the desperate designs which
this man meditates. Whether I am of the trifling consequence which my
life hitherto seems to intimate, or whether I have (as would appear from
my adversary’s conduct) such importance, by birth or fortune, as may
make me a desirable acquisition to a political faction, my resolution
is taken in either case. Those who read this journal, if it shall be
perused by impartial eyes, shall judge of me truly; and if they consider
me as a fool in encountering danger unnecessarily, they shall have no
reason to believe me a coward or a turncoat, when I find myself engaged
in it. I have been bred in sentiments of attachment to the family on the
throne and in these sentiments I will live and die. I have, indeed, some
idea that Mr. Herries has already discovered that I am made of different
and more unmalleable metal than he had at first believed. There were
letters from my dear Alan Fairford, giving a ludicrous account of my
instability of temper, in the same pocket-book, which, according to the
admission of my pretended guardian, fell under the investigation of
his domestic during the night I passed at Brokenburn, where, as I now
recollect, my wet clothes, with the contents of my pockets, were, with
the thoughtlessness of a young traveller, committed too rashly to the
care of a strange servant. And my kind friend and hospitable landlord,
Mr. Alexander Fairford, may also, and with justice, have spoken of my
levities to this man. But he shall find he has made a false estimate
upon these plausible grounds, since--

I must break off for the present.





LATIMER’S JOURNAL, IN CONTINUATION

There is at length a halt--at length I have gained so much privacy as to
enable me to continue my journal. It has become a sort of task of duty
to me, without the discharge of which I do not feel that the business
of the day is performed. True, no friendly eye may ever look upon these
labours, which have amused the solitary hours of an unhappy prisoner.
Yet, in the meanwhile, the exercise of the pen seems to act as a
sedative upon my own agitated thoughts and tumultuous passions. I never
lay it down but I rise stronger in resolution, more ardent in hope. A
thousand vague fears, wild expectations, and indigested schemes,
hurry through one’s thoughts in seasons of doubt and of danger. But by
arresting them as they flit across the mind, by throwing them on paper,
and even by that mechanical act compelling ourselves to consider them
with scrupulous and minute attention, we may perhaps escape becoming the
dupes of our own excited imagination; just as a young horse is cured of
the vice of starting by being made to stand still and look for some time
without any interruption at the cause of its terror.

There remains but one risk, which is that of discovery. But besides the
small characters, in which my residence in Mr. Fairford’s house enabled
me to excel, for the purpose of transferring as many scroll sheets as
possible to a huge sheet of stamped paper, I have, as I have elsewhere
intimated, had hitherto the comfortable reflection that if the record
of my misfortunes should fall into the hands of him by whom they are
caused, they would, without harming any one, show him the real character
and disposition of the person who has become his prisoner--perhaps his
victim. Now, however, that other names, and other characters, are to be
mingled with the register of my own sentiments, I must take additional
care of these papers, and keep them in such a manner that, in case
of the least hazard of detection, I may be able to destroy them at a
moment’s notice. I shall not soon or easily forget the lesson I have
been taught, by the prying disposition which Cristal Nixon, this man’s
agent and confederate, manifested at Brokenburn, and which proved the
original cause of my sufferings.

My laying aside the last sheet of my journal hastily was occasioned by
the unwonted sound of a violin, in the farmyard beneath my windows. It
will not appear surprising to those who have made music their study,
that, after listening to a few notes, I became at once assured that the
musician was no other than the itinerant, formerly mentioned as present
at the destruction of Joshua Geddes’s stake-nets, the superior delicacy
and force of whose execution would enable me to swear to his bow amongst
a whole orchestra. I had the less reason to doubt his identity, because
he played twice over the beautiful Scottish air called Wandering Willie;
and I could not help concluding that he did so for the purpose of
intimating his own presence, since what the French called the nom de
guerre of the performer was described by the tune.

Hope will catch at the most feeble twig for support in extremity. I knew
this man, though deprived of sight, to be bold, ingenious, and perfectly
capable of acting as a guide. I believed I had won his goodwill,
by having, in a frolic, assumed the character of his partner; and I
remembered that in a wild, wandering, and disorderly course of life,
men, as they become loosened from the ordinary bonds of civil society,
hold those of comradeship more closely sacred; so that honour is
sometimes found among thieves, and faith and attachment in such as the
law has termed vagrants. The history of Richard Coeur de Lion and his
minstrel, Blondel, rushed, at the same time, on my mind, though I
could not even then suppress a smile at the dignity of the example when
applied to a blind fiddler and myself. Still there was something in all
this to awaken a hope that, if I could open a correspondence with
this poor violer, he might be useful in extricating me from my present
situation.

His profession furnished me with some hope that this desired
communication might be attained; since it is well known that, in
Scotland, where there is so much national music, the words and airs
of which are generally known, there is a kind of freemasonry amongst
performers, by which they can, by the mere choice of a tune, express
a great deal to the hearers. Personal allusions are often made in this
manner, with much point and pleasantry; and nothing is more usual at
public festivals, than that the air played to accompany a particular
health or toast, is made the vehicle of compliment, of wit, and
sometimes of satire. [Every one must remember instances of this festive
custom, in which the adaptation of the tune to the toast was remarkably
felicitous. Old Neil Gow, and his son Nathaniel, were peculiarly happy
on such occasions.]

While these things passed through my mind rapidly, I heard my friend
beneath recommence, for the third time, the air from which his own
name had been probably adopted, when he was interrupted by his rustic
auditors.

‘If thou canst play no other spring but that, mon, ho hadst best put up
ho’s pipes and be jogging. Squoire will be back anon, or Master Nixon,
and we’ll see who will pay poiper then.’

Oho, thought I, if I have no sharper ears than those of my friends Jan
and Dorcas to encounter, I may venture an experiment upon them; and, as
most expressive of my state of captivity, I sang two or three lines of
the 137th Psalm--

  By Babel’s streams we sat and wept.

The country people listened with attention, and when I ceased, I heard
them whisper together in tones of commiseration, ‘Lack-a-day, poor soul!
so pretty a man to be beside his wits!’

‘An he be that gate,’ said Wandering Willie, in a tone calculated to
reach my ears, ‘I ken naething will raise his spirits like a spring.’
And he struck up, with great vigour and spirit, the lively Scottish air,
the words of which instantly occurred to me--

  Oh whistle and I’ll come t’ye, my lad,
  Oh whistle and I’ll come t’ye, my lad;
  Though father and mother and a’ should gae mad,
  Oh whistle and I’ll come t’ye, my lad.

I soon heard a clattering noise of feet in the courtyard, which I
concluded to be Jan and Dorcas dancing a jig in their Cumberland wooden
clogs. Under cover of this din, I endeavoured to answer Willie’s signal
by whistling, as loud as I could---

  Come back again and loe me
  When a’ the lave are gane.

He instantly threw the dancers out, by changing his air to

  There’s my thumb, I’ll ne’er beguile thee.

I no longer doubted that a communication betwixt us was happily
established, and that, if I had an opportunity of speaking to the poor
musician, I should find him willing to take my letter to the post,
to invoke the assistance of some active magistrate, or of the
commanding-officer of Carlisle Castle, or, in short, to do whatever
else I could point out, in the compass of his power, to contribute to
my liberation. But to obtain speech of him, I must have run the risk
of alarming the suspicions of Dorcas, if not of her yet more stupid
Corydon. My ally’s blindness prevented his receiving any communication
by signs from the window--even if I could have ventured to make
them, consistently with prudence--so that notwithstanding the mode of
intercourse we had adopted was both circuitous and peculiarly liable to
misapprehension, I saw nothing I could do better than to continue it,
trusting my own and my correspondent’s acuteness in applying to the airs
the meaning they were intended to convey. I thought of singing the words
themselves of some significant song, but feared I might, by doing so,
attract suspicion. I endeavoured, therefore, to intimate my speedy
departure from my present place of residence, by whistling the
well-known air with which festive parties in Scotland usually conclude
the dance:--

  Good night and joy be wi’ ye a’,
  For here nae langer maun I stay;
  There’s neither friend nor foe, of mine
  But wishes that I were away.

It appeared that Willie’s powers of intelligence were much more active
than mine, and that, like a deaf person accustomed to be spoken to by
signs, he comprehended, from the very first notes, the whole meaning I
intended to convey; and he accompanied me in the air with his violin,
in such a manner as at once to show he understood my meaning, and to
prevent my whistling from being attended to.

His reply was almost immediate, and was conveyed in the old martial air
of ‘Hey, Johnnie lad, cock up your beaver.’ I ran over the words, and
fixed on the following stanza, as most applicable to my circumstances:--

  Cock up your beaver, and cock it fu’ sprush;
  We’ll over the Border and give them a brush;
  There’s somebody there we’ll teach better behaviour,
  Hey, Johnnie lad, cock up your beaver.

If these sounds alluded, as I hope they do, to the chance of assistance
from my Scottish friends, I may indeed consider that a door is open to
hope and freedom. I immediately replied with:--

  My heart’s in the Highlands, my heart is not here;
  My heart’s in the Highlands, a-chasing the deer;
  A-chasing the wild deer, and following the roe,
  My heart’s in the Highlands wherever I go.

  Farewell to the Highlands!  farewell to the North!
  The birth-place of valour, the cradle of worth;
  Wherever I wander, wherever I rove,
  The hills of the Highlands for ever I love.

Willie instantly played, with a degree of spirit which might have
awakened hope in Despair herself, if Despair could be supposed to
understand Scotch music, the fine old Jacobite air,

  For a’ that, and a’ that,
  And twice as much as a’ that.

I next endeavoured to intimate my wish to send notice of my condition to
my friends; and, despairing to find an air sufficiently expressive of my
purpose, I ventured to sing a verse, which, in various forms, occurs so
frequently in old ballads--

  Whare will I get a bonny boy
  That will win hose and shoon:
  That will gae down to Durisdeer,
  And bid my merry men come?

He drowned the latter part of the verse by playing, with much emphasis,

  Kind Robin loes me.

Of this, though I ran over the verses of the song in my mind, I could
make nothing; and before I could contrive any mode of intimating my
uncertainty, a cry arose in the courtyard that Cristal Nixon was coming.
My faithful Willie was obliged to retreat; but not before he had half
played, half hummed, by way of farewell,

  Leave thee--leave thee, lad--
  I’ll never leave thee;
  The stars shall gae withershins
  Ere I will leave thee.

I am thus, I think, secure of one trusty adherent in my misfortunes;
and, however whimsical it may be to rely much on a man of his idle
profession and deprived of sight withal, it is deeply impressed on
my mind that his services may be both useful and necessary. There
is another quarter from which I look for succour, and which I have
indicated to thee, Alan, in more than one passage of my journal. Twice,
at the early hour of daybreak, I have seen the individual alluded to in
the court of the farm, and twice she made signs of recognition in
answer to the gestures by which I endeavoured to make her comprehend my
situation; but on both occasions she pressed her finger on her lips, as
expressive of silence and secrecy.

The manner in which G.M. entered upon the scene for the first time,
seems to assure me of her goodwill, so far as her power may reach; and I
have many reasons to believe it is considerable. Yet she seemed hurried
and frightened during the very transitory moments of our interview, and
I think was, upon the last occasion, startled by the entrance of some
one into the farmyard, just as she was on the point of addressing me.
You must not ask whether I am an early riser, since such objects are
only to be seen at daybreak; and although I have never again seen her,
yet I have reason to think she is not distant. It was but three
nights ago, that, worn out by the uniformity of my confinement, I had
manifested more symptoms of despondence than I had before exhibited,
which I conceive may have attracted the attention of the domestics,
through whom the circumstance might transpire. On the next morning, the
following lines lay on my table; but how conveyed there, I cannot tell.
The hand in which they were written is a beautiful Italian manuscript:--

  As lords their labourers’ hire delay,
  Fate quits our toil with hopes to come,
  Which, if far short of present pay,
  Still, owns a debt and names a sum.

  Quit not the pledge, frail sufferer, then,
  Although a distant date be given;
  Despair is treason towards man,
  And blasphemy to Heaven.

That these lines were written with the friendly purpose of inducing me
to keep up my spirits, I cannot doubt; and I trust the manner in which I
shall conduct myself may show that the pledge is accepted.

The dress is arrived in which it seems to be my self-elected guardian’s
pleasure that I shall travel; and what does it prove to be?--A skirt, or
upper-petticoat of camlet, like those worn by country ladies of moderate
rank when on horseback, with such a riding-mask as they frequently use
on journeys to preserve their eyes and complexion from the sun and dust,
and sometimes, it is suspected, to enable then to play off a little
coquetry. From the gayer mode of employing the mask, however, I suspect
I shall be precluded; for instead of being only pasteboard, covered with
black velvet, I observe with anxiety that mine is thickened with a plate
of steel, which, like Quixote’s visor, serves to render it more strong
and durable.

This apparatus, together with a steel clasp for securing the mask behind
me with a padlock, gave me fearful recollections of the unfortunate
being, who, never being permitted to lay aside such a visor, acquired
the well-known historical epithet of the Man in the Iron Mask. I
hesitated a moment whether I should, so far submit to the acts of
oppression designed against me as to assume this disguise, which was,
of course, contrived to aid their purposes. But when I remembered Mr.
Herries’s threat, that I should be kept close prisoner in a carriage,
unless I assumed the dress which should be appointed for me; and I
considered the comparative degree of freedom which I might purchase
by wearing the mask and female dress as easily and advantageously
purchased. Here, therefore, I must pause for the present, and await what
the morning may bring forth.

[To carry on the story from the documents before us, we think it proper
here to drop the journal of the captive Darsie Latimer, and adopt,
instead, a narrative of the proceedings of Alan Fairford in pursuit of
his friend, which forms another series in this history.]





NARRATIVE OF ALAN FAIRFORD

The reader ought, by this time, to have formed some idea of the
character of Alan Fairford. He had a warmth of heart which the study
of the law and of the world could not chill, and talents which they had
rendered unusually acute. Deprived of the personal patronage enjoyed by
most of his contemporaries, who assumed the gown under the protection of
their aristocratic alliances and descents, he early saw that he should
have that to achieve for himself which fell to them as a right of birth.
He laboured hard in silence and solitude, and his labours were crowned
with success. But Alan doted on his friend Darsie, even more than he
loved his profession, and, as we have seen, threw everything aside when
he thought Latimer in danger; forgetting fame and fortune, and hazarding
even the serious displeasure of his father, to rescue him whom he loved
with an elder brother’s affection. Darsie, though his parts were more
quick and brilliant than those of his friend, seemed always to the
latter a being under his peculiar charge, whom he was called upon
to cherish and protect in cases where the youth’s own experience was
unequal to the exigency; and now, when, the fate of Latimer seeming
worse than doubtful, Alan’s whole prudence and energy were to be exerted
in his behalf, an adventure which might have seemed perilous to most
youths of his age had no terrors for him. He was well acquainted with
the laws of his country, and knew how to appeal to them; and, besides
his professional confidence, his natural disposition was steady, sedate,
persevering, and undaunted. With these requisites he undertook a quest
which, at that time, was not unattended with actual danger, and had much
in it to appal a more timid disposition.

Fairford’s first inquiry concerning his friend was of the chief
magistrate of Dumfries, Provost Crosbie, who had sent the information
of Darsie’s disappearance. On his first application, he thought he
discerned in the honest dignitary a desire to get rid of the subject.
The provost spoke of the riot at the fishing station as an ‘outbreak
among those lawless loons the fishermen, which concerned the sheriff,’
he said, ‘more than us poor town council bodies, that have enough to do
to keep peace within burgh, amongst such a set of commoners as the town
are plagued with.’

‘But this is not all, Provost Crosbie,’ said Mr. Alan Fairford; ‘A young
gentleman of rank and fortune has disappeared amongst their hands--you
know him. My father gave him a letter to you--Mr. Darsie Latimer.’

‘Lack-a-day, yes! lack-a-day, yes!’ said the provost; ‘Mr. Darsie
Latimer--he dined at my house--I hope he is well?’

‘I hope so too,’ said Alan, rather indignantly; ‘but I desire more
certainty on that point. You yourself wrote my father that he had
disappeared.’

‘Troth, yes, and that is true,’ said the provost. ‘But did he not go
back to his friends in Scotland? it was not natural to think he would
stay here.’

‘Not unless he is under restraint,’ said Fairford, surprised at the
coolness with which the provost seemed to take up the matter.

‘Rely on it, sir,’ said Mr. Crosbie, ‘that if he has not returned to his
friends in Scotland, he must have gone to his friends in England.’

‘I will rely on no such thing,’ said Alan; ‘if there is law or justice
in Scotland, I will have the thing cleared to the very bottom.’

‘Reasonable, reasonable,’ said the provost, ‘so far as is possible; but
you know I have no power beyond the ports of the burgh.’

‘But you are in the commission besides, Mr. Crosbie; a justice of peace
for the county.’

‘True, very true--that is,’ said the cautious magistrate, ‘I will not
say but my name may stand on the list, but I cannot remember that I have
ever qualified.’ [By taking the oaths to government.]

‘Why, in that case,’ said young Fairford, ‘there are ill-natured people
might doubt your attachment to the Protestant line, Mr. Crosbie.’

‘God forbid, Mr. Fairford! I who have done and suffered in the
Forty-five. I reckon the Highlandmen did me damage to the amount of
100l. Scots, forby all they ate and drank--no, no, sir, I stand beyond
challenge; but as for plaguing myself with county business, let them
that aught the mare shoe the mare. The commissioners of supply would see
my back broken before they would help me in the burgh’s work, and all
the world kens the difference of the weight between public business in
burgh and landward. What are their riots to me? have we not riots enough
of our own?--But I must be getting ready, for the council meets this
forenoon. I am blithe to see your father’s son on the causeway of our
ancient burgh, Mr. Alan Fairford. Were you a twelve-month aulder, we
would make a burgess of you, man. I hope you will come and dine with
me before you go away. What think you of to-day at two o’clock--just a
roasted chucky and a drappit egg?’

Alan Fairford resolved that his friend’s hospitality should not, as it
seemed the inviter intended, put a stop to his queries. ‘I must delay
you for a moment,’ he said, ‘Mr. Crosbie; this is a serious affair; a
young gentleman of high hopes, my own dearest friend, is missing--you
cannot think it will be passed over slightly, if a man of your high
character and known zeal for the government do not make some active
inquiry. Mr. Crosbie, you are my father’s friend, and I respect you as
such--but to others it will have a bad appearance.’

The withers of the provost were not unwrung; he paced the room in much
tribulation, repeating, ‘But what can I do, Mr. Fairford? I warrant
your friend casts up again--he will come back again, like the ill
shilling--he is not the sort of gear that tynes--a hellicat boy, running
through the country with a blind fiddler and playing the fiddle to
a parcel of blackguards, who can tell where the like of him may have
scampered to?’

‘There are persons apprehended, and in the jail of the town, as I
understand from the sheriff-substitute,’ said Mr. Fairford; ‘you
must call them before you, and inquire what they know of this young
gentleman.’

‘Aye, aye--the sheriff-depute did commit some poor creatures, I
believe--wretched ignorant fishermen bodies, that had been quarrelling
with Quaker Geddes and his stake-nets, whilk, under favour of your gown
be it spoken, Mr. Fairford, are not over and above lawful, and the town
clerk thinks that they may be lawfully removed VIA FACTI--but that is by
the by. But, sir, the creatures were a’ dismissed for want of evidence;
the Quaker would not swear to them, and what could the sheriff and me
do but just let them loose? Come awa, cheer up, Master Alan, and take a
walk till dinner-time--I must really go to the council.’

‘Stop a moment, provost,’ said Alan; ‘I lodge a complaint before you as
a magistrate, and you will find it serious to slight it over. You must
have these men apprehended again.’

‘Aye, aye--easy said; but catch them that can,’ answered the provost;
‘they are ower the march by this time, or by the point of Cairn.--Lord
help ye! they are a kind of amphibious deevils, neither land nor water
beasts neither English nor Scots--neither county nor stewartry, as we
say--they are dispersed like so much quicksilver. You may as well try to
whistle a sealgh out of the Solway, as to get hold of one of them till
all the fray is over.’

‘Mr. Crosbie, this will not do,’ answered the young counsellor; ‘there
is a person of more importance than such wretches as you describe
concerned in this unhappy business--I must name to you a certain Mr.
Herries.’

He kept his eye on the provost as he uttered the name, which he did
rather at a venture, and from the connexion which that gentleman, and
his real or supposed niece, seemed to have with the fate of Darsie
Latimer, than from any distinct cause of suspicion which he entertained.
He thought the provost seemed embarrassed, though he showed much desire
to assume an appearance of indifference, in which he partly succeeded.

‘Herries!’ he said--‘What Herries?--There are many of that name--not
so many as formerly, for the old stocks are wearing out; but there is
Herries of Heathgill, and Herries of Auchintulloch, and Herries’--

‘To save you further trouble, this person’s designation is Herries of
Birrenswork.’

‘Of Birrenswork?’ said Mr. Crosbie; ‘I have you now, Mr. Alan. Could you
not as well have said, the Laird of Redgauntlet?’

Fairford was too wary to testify any surprise at this identification of
names, however unexpected. ‘I thought,’ said he, ‘he was more generally
known by the name of Herries. I have seen and been in company with him
under that name, I am sure.’

‘Oh aye; in Edinburgh, belike. You know Redgauntlet was unfortunate a
great while ago, and though he was maybe not deeper in the mire than
other folk, yet, for some reason or other, he did not get so easily
out.’

‘He was attainted, I understand; and has no remission,’ said Fairford.

The cautious provost only nodded, and said, ‘You may guess, therefore,
why it is so convenient he should hold his mother’s name, which is also
partly his own, when he is about Edinburgh. To bear his proper name
might be accounted a kind of flying in the face of government, ye
understand. But he has been long connived at--the story is an old
story--and the gentleman has many excellent qualities, and is of a very
ancient and honourable house--has cousins among the great folk--counts
kin with the advocate and with the sheriff--hawks, you know, Mr. Alan,
will not pike out hawks’ een--he is widely connected--my wife is a
fourth cousin of Redgauntlet’s.’

HINC ILLAE LACHRYMAE! thought Alan Fairford to himself; but the hint
presently determined him to proceed by soft means and with caution. ‘I
beg you to understand,’ said Fairford, ‘that in the investigation I am
about to make, I design no harm to Mr. Herries, or Redgauntlet--call him
what you will. All I wish is, to ascertain the safety of my friend. I
know that he was rather foolish in once going upon a mere frolic, in
disguise, to the neighbourhood of this same gentleman’s house. In his
circumstances, Mr. Redgauntlet may have misinterpreted the motives, and
considered Darsie Latimer as a spy. His influence, I believe, is great
among the disorderly people you spoke of but now?’

The provost answered with another sagacious shake of his head, that
would have done honour to Lord Burleigh in the CRITIC.

‘Well, then,’ continued Fairford,’ is it not possible that, in the
mistaken belief that Mr. Latimer was a spy, he may, upon such suspicion,
have caused him to be carried off and confined somewhere? Such things
are done at elections, and on occasions less pressing than when men
think their lives are in danger from an informer.’

‘Mr. Fairford,’ said the provost, very earnestly, ‘I scarce think such
a mistake possible; or if, by any extraordinary chance, it should have
taken place, Redgauntlet, whom I cannot but know well, being as I have
said my wife’s first cousin (fourth cousin, I should say) is altogether
incapable of doing anything harsh to the young gentleman--he might send
him ower to Ailsay for a night or two, or maybe land him on the north
coast of Ireland, or in Islay, or some of the Hebrides; but depend upon
it, he is incapable of harming a hair of his head.’

‘I am determined not to trust to that, provost,’ answered Fairford
firmly; ‘and I am a good deal surprised at your way of talking so
lightly of such an aggression on the liberty of the subject. You are
to consider, and Mr. Herries or Mr. Redgauntlet’s friends would do very
well also to consider, how it would sound in the ears of an English
Secretary of State, that an attainted traitor (for such is this
gentleman) has not only ventured to take up his abode in this
realm--against the king of which he has been in arms--but is suspected
of having proceeded, by open force and violence, against the person
of one of the lieges, a young man who is neither without friends nor
property to secure his being righted.’

The provost looked at the young counsellor with a face in which
distrust, alarm, and vexation seemed mingled. ‘A fashious job,’ he said
at last, ‘a fashious job; and it will be dangerous meddling with it.
I should like ill to see your father’s son turn informer against an
unfortunate gentleman.’

‘Neither do I mean it,’ answered Alan, ‘provided that unfortunate
gentleman and his friends give me a quiet opportunity of securing my
friend’s safety. If I could speak with Mr. Redgauntlet, and hear his own
explanation, I should probably be satisfied. If I am forced, to denounce
him to government, it will be in his new capacity of a kidnapper. I may
not be able, nor is it my business, to prevent his being recognized in
his former character of an attainted person, excepted from the general
pardon.’

‘Master Fairford,’ said the provost, ‘would ye ruin the poor innocent
gentleman on an idle suspicion?’

‘Say no more of it, Mr. Crosbie; my line of conduct is
determined--unless that suspicion is removed.’

‘Weel, sir,’ said the provost, ‘since so it be, and since you say that
you do not seek to harm Redgauntlet personally, I’ll ask a man to dine
with us to-day that kens as much about his matters as most folk. You
must think, Mr. Alan Fairford, though Redgauntlet be my wife’s near
relative, and though, doubtless, I wish him weel, yet I am not the
person who is like to be intrusted with his incomings and outgoings. I
am not a man for that--I keep the kirk, and I abhor Popery--I have stood
up for the House of Hanover, and for liberty and property--I carried
arms, sir, against the Pretender, when three of the Highlandmen’s
baggage-carts were stopped at Ecclefechan; and I had an especial loss of
a hundred pounds’--

‘Scots,’ interrupted Fairford. ‘You forget you told me all this before.’

‘Scots or English, it was too much for me to lose,’ said the provost;
so you see I am not a person to pack or peel with Jacobites, and such
unfreemen as poor Redgauntlet.’

‘Granted, granted, Mr. Crosbie; and what then?’ said Alan Fairford.

‘Why, then, it follows, that if I am to help you at this pinch, if
cannot be by and through my ain personal knowledge, but through some
fitting agent or third person.’

‘Granted again,’ said Fairford. ‘And pray who may this third person be?’

‘Wha but Pate Maxwell of Summertrees--him they call Pate-in-Peril.’

‘An old Forty-five man, of course?’ said Fairford.

‘Ye may swear that,’ replied the provost--‘as black a Jacobite as the
auld leaven can make him; but a sonsy, merry companion, that none of us
think it worth while to break wi’ for all his brags and his clavers.
You would have thought, if he had had but his own way at Derby, he would
have marched Charlie Stuart through between Wade and the Duke, as a
thread goes through the needle’s ee, and seated him in Saint James’s
before you could have said haud your hand. But though he is a windy body
when he gets on his auld-warld stories, he has mair gumption in him than
most people--knows business, Mr. Alan, being bred to the law; but never
took the gown, because of the oaths, which kept more folk out then than
they do now--the more’s the pity.’

‘What! are you sorry, provost, that Jacobitism is upon the decline?’
said Fairford.

‘No, no,’ answered the provost--‘I am only sorry for folks losing the
tenderness of conscience which they used to have. I have a son breeding
to the bar, Mr. Fairford; and, no doubt, considering my services and
sufferings, I might have looked for some bit postie to him; but if the
muckle tykes come in--I mean a’ these Maxwells, and Johnstones, and
great lairds, that the oaths used to keep out lang syne--the bits o’
messan doggies, like my son, and maybe like your father’s son, Mr. Alan,
will be sair put to the wall.’

‘But to return to the subject, Mr. Crosbie,’ said Fairford, ‘do you
really think it likely that this Mr. Maxwell will be of service in this
matter?’

‘It’s very like he may be, for he is the tongue of the trump to the
whole squad of them,’ said the provost; ‘and Redgauntlet, though he will
not stick at times to call him a fool, takes more of his counsel than
any man’s else that I am aware of. If Fate can bring him to a communing,
the business is done. He’s a sharp chield, Pate-in-Peril.’

‘Pate-in-Peril!’ repeated Alan; ‘a very singular name.’

‘Aye, and it was in as queer a way he got it; but I’ll say naething
about that,’ said the provost, ‘for fear of forestalling his market;
for ye are sure to hear it once at least, however oftener, before the
punch-bowl gives place to the teapot.--And now, fare ye weel; for there
is the council-bell clinking in earnest; and if I am not there before it
jows in, Bailie Laurie will be trying some of his manoeuvres.’

The provost, repeating his expectation of seeing Mr. Fairford at two
o’clock, at length effected his escape from the young counsellor, and
left him at a considerable loss how to proceed. The sheriff, it seems,
had returned to Edinburgh, and he feared to find the visible repugnance
of the provost to interfere with this Laird of Birrenswork, or
Redgauntlet, much stronger amongst the country gentlemen, many of
whom were Catholics as well as Jacobites, and most others unwilling to
quarrel with kinsmen and friends, by prosecuting with severity political
offences which had almost run a prescription.

To collect all the information in his power, and not to have recourse
to the higher authorities until he could give all the light of which
the case was capable, seemed the wiser proceeding in a choice of
difficulties. He had some conversation with the procurator-fiscal, who,
as well as the provost, was an old correspondent of his father. Alan
expressed to that officer a purpose of visiting Brokenburn, but was
assured by him, that it would be a step attended with much danger to his
own person, and altogether fruitless; that the individuals who had
been ringleaders in the riot were long since safely sheltered in their
various lurking-holes in the Isle of Man, Cumberland, and elsewhere; and
that those who might remain would undoubtedly commit violence on any
who visited their settlement with the purpose of inquiring into the late
disturbances.

There were not the same objections to his hastening to Mount Sharon,
where he expected to find the latest news of his friend; and there
was time enough to do so, before the hour appointed for the provost’s
dinner. Upon the road, he congratulated himself on having obtained one
point of almost certain information. The person who had in a manner
forced himself upon his father’s hospitality, and had appeared desirous
to induce Darsie Latimer to visit England, against whom, too, a sort of
warning had been received from an individual connected with and residing
in his own family, proved to be a promoter of the disturbance in which
Darsie had disappeared.

What could be the cause of such an attempt on the liberty of an
inoffensive and amiable man? It was impossible it could be merely owing
to Redgauntlet’s mistaking Darsie for a spy; for though that was the
solution which Fairford had offered to the provost, he well knew that,
in point of fact, he himself had been warned by his singular visitor of
some danger to which his friend was exposed, before such suspicion could
have been entertained; and the injunctions received by Latimer from his
guardian, or him who acted as such, Mr. Griffiths of London, pointed to
the same thing. He was rather glad, however, that he had not let Provost
Crosbie into his secret further than was absolutely necessary; since it
was plain that the connexion of his wife with the suspected party was
likely to affect his impartiality as a magistrate.

When Alan Fairford arrived at Mount Sharon, Rachel Geddes hastened to
meet him, almost before the servant could open the door. She drew back
in disappointment when she beheld a stranger, and said, to excuse her
precipitation, that ‘she had thought it was her brother Joshua returned
from Cumberland.’

‘Mr. Geddes is then absent from home?’ said Fairford, much disappointed
in his turn.

‘He hath been gone since yesterday, friend,’ answered Rachel, once more
composed to the quietude which characterizes her sect, but her pale
cheek and red eye giving contradiction to her assumed equanimity.

‘I am,’ said Fairford, hastily, ‘the particular friend of a young man
not unknown to you, Miss Geddes--the friend of Darsie Latimer--and
am come hither in the utmost anxiety, having understood from Provost
Crosbie, that he had disappeared in the night when a destructive attack
was made upon the fishing-station of Mr. Geddes.’

‘Thou dost afflict me, friend, by thy inquiries,’ said Rachel, more
affected than before; ‘for although the youth was like those of the
worldly generation, wise in his own conceit, and lightly to be moved by
the breath of vanity, yet Joshua loved him, and his heart clave to him
as if he had been his own son. And when he himself escaped from the sons
of Belial, which was not until they had tired themselves with reviling,
and with idle reproach, and the jests of the scoffer, Joshua, my
brother, returned to them once and again, to give ransom for the
youth called Darsie Latimer, with offers of money and with promise of
remission, but they would not hearken to him. Also, he went before the
head judge, whom men call the sheriff, and would have told him of the
youth’s peril; but he would in no way hearken to him unless he would
swear unto the truth of his words, which thing he might not do without
sin, seeing it is written, Swear not at all--also, that our conversation
shall be yea or nay. Therefore, Joshua returned to me disconsolate,
and said, “Sister Rachel, this youth hath run into peril for my sake;
assuredly I shall not be guiltless if a hair of his head be harmed,
seeing I have sinned in permitting him to go with me to the fishing
station when such evil was to be feared. Therefore, I will take my
horse, even Solomon, and ride swiftly into Cumberland, and I will make
myself friends with Mammon of Unrighteousness, among the magistrates of
the Gentiles, and among their mighty men; and it shall come to pass that
Darsie Latimer shall be delivered, even if it were at the expense of
half my substance.” And I said, “Nay, my brother, go not, for they
will but scoff at and revile thee; but hire with thy silver one of the
scribes, who are eager as hunters in pursuing their prey, and he shall
free Darsie Latimer from the men of violence by his cunning, and thy
soul shall be guiltless of evil towards the lad.” But he answered and
said, “I will not be controlled in this matter.” And he is gone forth
and hath not returned, and I fear me that he may never return; for
though he be peaceful, as becometh one who holds all violence as offence
against his own soul, yet neither the floods of water, nor the fear of
the snare, nor the drawn sword of the adversary brandished in the path,
will overcome his purpose. Wherefore the Solway may swallow him up, or
the sword of the enemy may devour him--nevertheless, my hope is better
in Him who directeth all things, and ruleth over the waves of the sea,
and overruleth the devices of the wicked, and who can redeem us even as
a bird from the fowler’s net.’

This was all that Fairford could learn from Miss Geddes; but he heard
with pleasure that the good Quaker, her brother, had many friends among
those of his own profession in Cumberland, and without exposing himself
to so much danger as his sister seemed to apprehend, he trusted he might
be able to discover some traces of Darsie Latimer. He himself rode back
to Dumfries, having left with Miss Geddes his direction in that
place, and an earnest request that she would forward thither whatever
information she might obtain from her brother.

On Fairford’s return to Dumfries, he employed the brief interval which
remained before dinner-time, in writing an account of what had befallen
Latimer and of the present uncertainty of his condition, to Mr. Samuel
Griffiths, through whose hands the remittances for his friend’s service
had been regularly made, desiring he would instantly acquaint him with
such parts of his history as might direct him in the search which he
was about to institute through the border counties, and which he pledged
himself not; to give up until he had obtained news of his friend, alive
or dead, The young lawyer’s mind felt easier when he had dispatched this
letter. He could not conceive any reason why his friend’s life should be
aimed at; he knew Darsie had done nothing by which his liberty could
be legally affected; and although, even of late years, there had been
singular histories of men, and women also, who had been trepanned,
and concealed in solitudes and distant islands in order to serve some
temporary purpose, such violences had been chiefly practised by the rich
on the poor, and by the strong on the feeble; whereas, in the present
case, this Mr. Herries, or Redgauntlet, being amenable, for more reasons
than one, to the censure of the law, must be the weakest in any struggle
in which it could be appealed to. It is true, that his friendly anxiety
whispered that the very cause which rendered this oppressor less
formidable, might make him more desperate. Still, recalling his
language, so strikingly that of the gentleman, and even of the man
of honour, Alan Fairford concluded, that though, in his feudal pride,
Redgauntlet might venture on the deeds of violence exercised by the
aristocracy in other times, he could not be capable of any action of
deliberate atrocity. And in these convictions he went to dine with
Provost Crosbie, with a heart more at ease than might have been
expected. [See Note 7.]





NARRATIVE OF ALAN FAIRFORD, CONTINUED

Five minutes had elapsed after the town clock struck two, before
Alan Fairford, who had made a small detour to put his letter into the
post-house, reached the mansion of Mr. Provost Crosbie, and was at once
greeted by the voice of that civic dignitary, and the rural dignitary
his visitor, as by the voices of men impatient for their dinner.

‘Come away, Mr. Fairford--the Edinburgh time is later than ours,’ said
the provost.

And, ‘Come away, young gentleman,’ said the laird; ‘I remember your
father weel at the Cross thirty years ago--I reckon you are as late in
Edinburgh as at London, four o’clock hours--eh?’

‘Not quite so degenerate,’ replied Fairford; ‘but certainly many
Edinburgh people are so ill-advised as to postpone their dinner
till three, that they may have full time to answer their London
correspondents.’

‘London correspondents!’ said Mr. Maxwell; ‘and pray what the devil have
the people of Auld Reekie to do with London correspondents?’ [Not much
in those days, for within my recollection the London post; was brought
north in a small mail-cart; and men are yet as live who recollect when
it came down with only one single letter for Edinburgh, addressed to the
manager of the British Linen Company.]

‘The tradesmen must have their goods,’ said Fairford.

‘Can they not buy our own Scottish manufactures, and pick their
customers pockets in a more patriotic manner?’

‘Then the ladies must have fashions,’ said Fairford.

‘Can they not busk the plaid over their heads, as their mothers did? A
tartan screen, and once a year a new cockernony from Paris, should
serve a countess. But ye have not many of them left, I think--Mareschal,
Airley, Winton, Vemyss, Balmerino, all passed and gone--aye, aye, the
countesses and ladies of quality will scarce take up too much of your
ball-room floor with their quality hoops nowadays.’

‘There is no want of crowding, however, sir,’ said Fairford; ‘they begin
to talk of a new Assembly room.’

‘A new Assembly room!’ said the old Jacobite laird--‘Umph--I mind
quartering three hundred men in the old Assembly room [I remember
hearing this identical answer given by an old Highland gentleman of the
Forty-Five, when he heard of the opening of the New Assembly Rooms in
George Street.]--But come, come--I’ll ask no more questions--the answers
all smell of new lords new lands, and do but spoil my appetite, which
were a pity, since here comes Mrs. Crosbie to say our mutton’s ready.’

It was even so. Mrs. Crosbie had been absent, like Eve, ‘on hospitable
cares intent,’ a duty which she did not conceive herself exempted from,
either by the dignity of her husband’s rank in the municipality, or the
splendour of her Brussels silk gown, or even by the more highly prized
lustre of her birth; for she was born a Maxwell, and allied, as her
husband often informed his friends, to several of the first families in
the county. She had been handsome, and was still a portly, good-looking
woman of her years; and though her peep into the kitchen had somewhat
heightened her complexion, it was no more than a modest touch of rouge
might have done.

The provost was certainly proud of his lady, nay, some said he was
afraid of her; for of the females of the Redgauntlet family there went a
rumour, that, ally where they would, there was a grey mare as surely in
the stables of their husbands, as there is a white horse in Wouvermans’
pictures. The good dame, too, was supposed to have brought a spice of
politics into Mr. Crosbie’s household along with her; and the provost’s
enemies at the council-table of the burgh used to observe that he
uttered there many a bold harangue against the Pretender, and in favour
of King George and government, of which he dared not have pronounced
a syllable in his own bedchamber; and that, in fact, his wife’s
predominating influence had now and then occasioned his acting,
or forbearing to act, in a manner very different from his general
professions of zeal for Revolution principles. If this was in any
respect true, it was certain, on the other hand, that Mrs. Crosbie, in
all external points, seemed to acknowledge the ‘lawful sway and right
supremacy’ of the head of the house, and if she did not in truth
reverence her husband, she at least seemed to do so.

This stately dame received Mr. Maxwell (a cousin of course) with
cordiality, and Fairford with civility; answering at the same time with
respect, to the magisterial complaints of the provost, that dinner was
just coming up. ‘But since you changed poor Peter MacAlpin, that used
to take care of the town-clock, my dear, it has never gone well a single
day.’

‘Peter MacAlpin, my dear,’ said the provost,’ made himself too busy for
a person in office, and drunk healths and so forth, which it became no
man to drink or to pledge, far less one that is in point of office a
servant of the public, I understand that he lost the music bells in
Edinburgh, for playing “Ower the Water to Charlie,” upon the tenth of
June. He is a black sheep, and deserves no encouragement.’

‘Not a bad tune though, after all,’ said Summertrees; and, turning to
the window, he half hummed, half whistled, the air in question, then
sang the last verse aloud:

  ‘Oh I loe weel my Charlie’s name,
    Though some there be that abhor him;
   But oh to see the deil gang hame
    Wi’ a’ the Whigs before him!
   Over the water, and over the sea,
    And over the water to Charlie;
   Come weal, come woe, we’ll gather and go,
    And live or die with Charlie.’

Mrs. Crosbie smiled furtively on the laird, wearing an aspect at the
same time of deep submission; while the provost, not choosing to hear
his visitor’s ditty, took a turn through the room, in unquestioned
dignity and independence of authority.

‘Aweel, aweel, my dear,’ said the lady, with a quiet smile of
submission, ‘ye ken these matters best, and you will do your
pleasure--they are far above my hand--only, I doubt if ever the
town-clock will go right, or your meals be got up so regular as I should
wish, till Peter MacAlpin gets his office back again. The body’s auld,
and can neither work nor want, but he is the only hand to set a clock.’

It may be noticed in passing, that notwithstanding this prediction,
which, probably, the fair Cassandra had the full means of accomplishing,
it was not till the second council day thereafter that the misdemeanours
of the Jacobite clock-keeper were passed over, and he was once more
restored to his occupation of fixing the town’s time, and the provost’s
dinner-hour.

Upon the present occasion the dinner passed pleasantly away. Summertrees
talked and jested with the easy indifference of a man who holds himself
superior to his company. He was indeed an important person, as was
testified by his portly appearance; his hat laced with POINT D’ESPAGNE;
his coat and waistcoat once richly embroidered, though now almost
threadbare; the splendour of his solitaire, and laced ruffles, though
the first was sorely creased, and the other sullied; not to forget the
length of his silver-hilted rapier. His wit, or rather humour, bordered
on the sarcastic, and intimated a discontented man; and although he
showed no displeasure when the provost attempted a repartee, yet it
seemed that he permitted it upon mere sufferance, as a fencing-master,
engaged with a pupil, will sometimes permit the tyro to hit him, solely
by way of encouragement. The laird’s own jests, in the meanwhile, were
eminently successful, not only with the provost and his lady, but with
the red-cheeked and red-ribboned servant-maid who waited at table, and
who could scarce perform her duty with propriety, so effectual were the
explosions of Summertrees. Alan Fairford alone was unmoved among all
this mirth; which was the less wonderful, that, besides the important
subject which occupied his thoughts, most of the laird’s good things
consisted in sly allusions to little parochial or family incidents,
with which the Edinburgh visitor was totally unacquainted: so that the
laughter of the party sounded in his ear like the idle crackling of
thorns under the pot, with this difference, that they did not accompany
or second any such useful operation as the boiling thereof.

Fairford was glad when the cloth was withdrawn; and when Provost Crosbie
(not without some points of advice from his lady touching the precise
mixture of the ingredients) had accomplished the compounding of a noble
bowl of punch, at which the old Jacobite’s eyes seemed to glisten, the
glasses were pushed round it, filled, and withdrawn each by its owner,
when the provost emphatically named the toast, ‘The King,’ with an
important look to Fairford, which seemed to say, You can have no doubt
whom I mean, and therefore there is no occasion to particularize the
individual.

Summertrees repeated the toast, with a sly wink to the lady, while
Fairford drank his glass in silence.

‘Well, young advocate,’ said the landed proprietor, ‘I am glad to see
there is some shame, if there is little honesty, left in the Faculty.
Some of your black gowns, nowadays, have as little of the one as of the
other.’

‘At least, sir,’ replied Mr. Fairford, ‘I am so much of a lawyer as not
willingly to enter into disputes which I am not retained to support--it
would be but throwing away both time and argument.’

‘Come, come,’ said the lady, ‘we will have no argument in this house
about Whig or Tory--the provost kens what he maun SAY, and I ken what he
should THINK; and for a’ that has come and gane yet, there may be a time
coming when honest men may say what they think, whether they be provosts
or not.’

‘D’ye hear that, provost?’ said Summertrees; ‘your wife’s a witch, man;
you should nail a horseshoe on your chamber door--Ha, ha, ha!’

This sally did not take quite so well as former efforts of the laird’s
wit. The lady drew up, and the provost said, half aside, ‘The sooth
bourd is nae bourd. [The true joke is no joke.] You will find the
horseshoe hissing hot, Summertrees.’

‘You can speak from experience, doubtless, provost,’ answered the
laird; ‘but I crave pardon--I need not tell Mrs. Crosbie that I have all
respect for the auld and honourable House of Redgauntlet.’

‘And good reason ye have, that are sae sib to them,’ quoth the lady,
‘and kend weel baith them that are here, and them that are gane.’

‘In troth, and ye may say sae, madam,’ answered the laird; ‘for poor
Harry Redgauntlet, that suffered at Carlisle, was hand and glove with
me; and yet we parted on short leave-taking.’

‘Aye, Summertrees,’ said the provost; ‘that was when you played
Cheat-the-woodie, and gat the by-name of Pate-in-Peril. I wish you would
tell the story to my young friend here. He likes weel to hear of a sharp
trick, as most lawyers do.’

‘I wonder at your want of circumspection, provost,’ said the
laird,--much after the manner of a singer when declining to sing the
song that is quivering upon his tongue’s very end. ‘Ye should mind there
are some auld stories that cannot be ripped up again with entire safety
to all concerned. TACE is Latin for a candle,’

‘I hope,’ said the lady, ‘you are not afraid of anything being said out
of this house to your prejudice, Summertrees? I have heard the story
before; but the oftener I hear it, the more wonderful I think it.’

‘Yes, madam; but it has been now a wonder of more than nine days, and it
is time it should be ended,’ answered Maxwell.

Fairford now thought it civil to say, ‘that he had often heard of Mr.
Maxwell’s wonderful escape, and that nothing could be more agreeable to
him than to hear the right version of it.’

But Summertrees was obdurate, and refused to take up the time of the
company with such ‘auld-warld nonsense.’

‘Weel, weel,’ said the provost, ‘a wilful man maun hae his way. What do
your folk in the country think about the disturbances that are beginning
to spunk out in the colonies?’

‘Excellent, sir, excellent. When things come to the worst; they will
mend; and to the worst they are coming. But as to that nonsense ploy
of mine, if ye insist on hearing the particulars,’--said the laird, who
began to be sensible that the period of telling his story gracefully was
gliding fast away.

‘Nay,’ said the provost, ‘it was not for myself, but this young
gentlemen.’

‘Aweel, what for should I not pleasure the young gentlemen? I’ll
just drink to honest folk at hame and abroad, and deil ane else. And
then--but you have heard it before, Mrs. Crosbie?’

‘Not so often as to think it tiresome, I assure ye,’ said the lady; and
without further preliminaries, the laird addressed Alan Fairford.

‘Ye have heard of a year they call the FORTY-FIVE, young gentleman;
when the Southrons’ heads made their last acquaintance with Scottish
claymores? There was a set of rampauging chields in the country then
that they called rebels--I never could find out what for--Some men
should have been wi’ them that never came, provost--Skye and the Bush
aboon Traquair for that, ye ken.--Weel, the job was settled at last.
Cloured crowns were plenty, and raxed necks came into fashion. I dinna
mind very weel what I was doing, swaggering about the country with dirk
and pistol at my belt for five or six months, or thereaway; but I had
a weary waking out of a wild dream. When did I find myself on foot in a
misty morning, with my hand, just for fear of going astray, linked into
a handcuff, as they call it, with poor Harry Redgauntlet’s fastened into
the other; and there we were, trudging along, with about a score more
that had thrust their horns ower deep in the bog, just like ourselves,
and a sergeant’s guard of redcoats, with twa file of dragoons, to
keep all quiet, and give us heart to the road. Now, if this mode of
travelling was not very pleasant, the object did not particularly
recommend it; for, you understand, young man, that they did not trust
these poor rebel bodies to be tried by juries of their ain kindly
countrymen, though ane would have thought they would have found Whigs
enough in Scotland to hang us all; but they behoved to trounce us away
to be tried at Carlisle, where the folk had been so frightened, that
had you brought a whole Highland clan at once into the court, they would
have put their hands upon their een, and cried, “hang them a’,” just to
be quit of them.’

‘Aye, aye,’ said the provost, ‘that was a snell law, I grant ye.’

‘Snell!’ said the wife, ‘snell! I wish they that passed it had the jury
I would recommend them to!’

‘I suppose the young lawyer thinks it all very right,’ said Summertrees,
looking at Fairford--‘an OLD lawyer might have thought otherwise.
However, the cudgel was to be found to beat the dog, and they chose
a heavy one. Well, I kept my spirits better than my companion, poor
fellow; for I had the luck to have neither wife nor child to think
about, and Harry Redgauntlet had both one and t’other.--You have seen
Harry, Mrs. Crosbie?’

‘In troth have I,’ said she, with the sigh which we give to early
recollections, of which the object is no more. ‘He was not so tall as
his brother, and a gentler lad every way. After he married the great
English fortune, folk called him less of a Scottishman than Edward.’

‘Folk lee’d, then,’ said Summertrees; ‘poor Harry was none of your
bold-speaking, ranting reivers, that talk about what they did yesterday,
or what they will do to-morrow; it was when something was to do at the
moment that you should have looked at Harry Redgauntlet. I saw him at
Culloden, when all was lost, doing more than twenty of these bleezing
braggarts, till the very soldiers that took him cried not to hurt
him--for all somebody’s orders, provost--for he was the bravest fellow
of them all. Weel, as I went by the side of Harry, and felt him raise my
hand up in the mist of the morning, as if he wished to wipe his eye--for
he had not that freedom without my leave--my very heart was like to
break for him, poor fellow. In the meanwhile, I had been trying and
trying to make my hand as fine as a lady’s, to see if I could slip it
out of my iron wristband. You may think,’ he said, laying his broad bony
hand on the table, ‘I had work enough with such a shoulder-of-mutton
fist; but if you observe, the shackle-bones are of the largest, and so
they were obliged to keep the handcuff wide; at length I got my hand
slipped out, and slipped in again; and poor Harry was sae deep in his
ain thoughts, I could not make him sensible what I was doing.’

‘Why not?’ said Alan Fairford, for whom the tale began to have some
interest.

‘Because there was an unchancy beast of a dragoon riding close beside
us on the other side; and if I had let him into my confidence as well as
Harry, it would not have been long before a pistol-ball slapped through
my bonnet.--Well, I had little for it but to do the best I could for
myself; and, by my conscience, it was time, when the gallows was staring
me in the face. We were to halt for breakfast at Moffat. Well did I know
the moors we were marching over, having hunted and hawked on every acre
of ground in very different times. So I waited, you see, till I was on
the edge of Errickstane-brae--Ye ken the place they call the Marquis’s
Beef-stand, because the Annandale loons used to put their stolen cattle
in there?’

Fairford intimated his ignorance,

‘Ye must have seen it as ye came this way; it looks as if four hills
were laying their heads together, to shut out daylight from the dark
hollow space between them. A d--d deep, black, blackguard-looking
abyss of a hole it is, and goes straight down from the roadside, as
perpendicular as it can do, to be a heathery brae. At the bottom, there
is a small bit of a brook, that you would think could hardly find, its
way out from the hills that are so closely jammed round it.’

‘A bad pass, indeed,’ said Alan.

‘You may say that,’ continued the laird. ‘Bad as it was, sir, it was
my only chance; and though my very flesh creeped when I thought what a
rumble I was going to get, yet I kept my heart up all the same. And so,
just when we came on the edge of this Beef-stand of the Johnstones, I
slipped out my hand from the handcuff, cried to Harry Gauntlet, ‘Follow
me!’--whisked under the belly of the dragoon horse--flung my plaid round
me with the speed of lightning--threw myself on my side, for there was
no keeping my feet, and down the brae hurled I, over heather and fern,
and blackberries, like a barrel down Chalmer’s Close, in Auld Reekie.
G--, sir, I never could help laughing when I think how the scoundrel
redcoats must have been bumbazed; for the mist being, as I said, thick,
they had little notion, I take it, that they were on the verge of such
a dilemma. I was half way down--for rowing is faster wark than
rinning--ere they could get at their arms; and then it was flash, flash,
flash--rap, rap, rap--from the edge of the road; but my head was too
jumbled to think anything either of that or the hard knocks I got among
the stones. I kept my senses thegither, whilk has been thought wonderful
by all that ever saw the place; and I helped myself with my hands as
gallantly as I could, and to the bottom I came. There I lay for half
a moment; but the thoughts of a gallows is worth all the salts and
scent-bottles in the world for bringing a man to himself. Up I sprang,
like a four-year-auld colt. All the hills were spinning round with me,
like so many great big humming-tops. But there was nae time to think of
that neither; more especially as the mist had risen a little with the
firing. I could see the villains, like sae mony craws on the edge of
the brae; and I reckon that they saw me; for some of the loons were
beginning to crawl down the hill, but liker auld wives in their red
cloaks, coming frae a field preaching, than such a souple lad as I was.
Accordingly, they soon began to stop and load their pieces. Good-e’en to
you, gentlemen, thought I, if that is to be the gate of it. If you have
any further word with me, you maun come as far as Carriefraw-gauns. And
so off I set, and never buck went faster ower the braes than I did; and
I never stopped till I had put three waters, reasonably deep, as the
season was rainy, half a dozen mountains, and a few thousand acres
of the worst moss and ling in Scotland, betwixt me and my friends the
redcoats.’

‘It was that job which got you the name of Pate-in-Peril,’ said the
provost, filling the glasses, and exclaiming with great emphasis,
while his guest, much animated with the recollections which the
exploit excited, looked round with an air of triumph for sympathy and
applause,--‘Here is to your good health; and may you never put your neck
in such a venture again.’ [The escape of a Jacobite gentleman while on
the road to Carlisle to take his trial for his share in the affair of
1745, took place at Errickstane-brae, in the singular manner ascribed to
the Laird of Summertrees in the text. The author has seen in his youth
the gentleman to whom the adventure actually happened. The distance of
time makes some indistinctness of recollection, but it is believed the
real name was MacEwen or MacMillan.]

‘Humph!--I do not know,’ answered Summertrees. ‘I am not like to be
tempted with another opportunity--[An old gentleman of the author’s name
was engaged in the affair of 1715, and with some difficulty was saved
from the gallows by the intercession of the Duchess of Buccleugh and
Monmouth. Her Grace, who maintained a good deal of authority over her
clan, sent for the object of her intercession, and warning him of the
risk which he had run, and the trouble she had taken on his account,
wound up her lecture by intimating that in case of such disloyalty
again, he was not to expect her interest in his favour. ‘An it please
your Grace,’ said the stout old Tory, ‘I fear I am too old to see
another opportunity.’] Yet who knows?’ And then he made a deep pause.

‘May I ask what became of your friend, sir?’ said Alan Fairford.

‘Ah, poor Harry!’ said Summertrees. ‘I’ll tell you what, sir, it takes
time to make up one’s mind to such a venture, as my friend the provost
calls it; and I was told by Neil Maclean,--who was next file to us,
but had the luck to escape the gallows by some sleight-of-hand trick
or other,--that, upon my breaking off, poor Harry stood like one
motionless, although all our brethren in captivity made as much tumult
as they could, to distract the attention of the soldiers. And run he did
at last; but he did not know the ground, and either from confusion, or
because he judged the descent altogether perpendicular, he fled up
the hill to the left, instead of going down at once, and so was easily
pursued and taken. If he had followed my example, he would have found
enough among the shepherds to hide him, and feed him, as they did me,
on bearmeal scenes and braxy mutton, till better days came round again.’
[BRAXY MUTTON.--The flesh of sheep that has died of disease, not by
the hand of the butcher. In pastoral countries it is used as food with
little scruple.]

‘He suffered then for his share in the insurrection?’ said Alan.

‘You may swear that,’ said Summertrees. ‘His blood was too red to be
spared when that sort of paint was in request. He suffered, sir, as
you call it--that is, he was murdered in cold blood, with many a pretty
fellow besides. Well, we may have our day next--what is fristed is not
forgiven--they think us all dead and buried--but’--Here he filled his
glass, and muttering some indistinct denunciations, drank it off, and
assumed his usual manner, which had been a little disturbed towards the
end of the narrative.

‘What became of Mr. Redgauntlet’s child?’ said Fairford.

MISTER Redgauntlet! He was Sir Henry Redgauntlet, as his son, if the
child now lives, will be Sir Arthur--I called him Harry from intimacy,
and Redgauntlet, as the chief of his name--His proper style was Sir
Henry Redgauntlet.’

‘His son, therefore, is dead?’ said Alan Fairford. ‘It is a pity so
brave a line should draw to a close.’

‘He has left a brother,’ said Summertrees, ‘Edward Hugh Redgauntlet, who
has now the representation of the family. And well it is; for though he
be unfortunate in many respects, he will keep up the honour of the house
better than a boy bred up amongst these bitter Whigs, the relations of
his elder brother Sir Henry’s lady. Then they are on no good terms with
the Redgauntlet line--bitter Whigs they are in every sense. It was a
runaway match betwixt Sir Henry and his lady. Poor thing, they would not
allow her to see him when in confinement--they had even the meanness to
leave him without pecuniary assistance; and as all his own property was
seized upon and plundered, he would have wanted common necessaries, but
for the attachment of a fellow who was a famous fiddler--a blind man--I
have seen him with Sir Henry myself, both before the affair broke out
and while it was going on. I have heard that he fiddled in the streets
of Carlisle, and carried what money he got to his master, while he was
confined in the castle.’

‘I do not believe a word of it,’ said Mrs. Crosbie, kindling with
indignation. ‘A Redgauntlet would have died twenty times before he had
touched a fiddler’s wages.’

‘Hout fye--hout fye--all nonsense and pride,’ said the Laird of
Summertrees. ‘Scornful dogs will eat dirty puddings, cousin Crosbie--ye
little ken what some of your friends were obliged to do yon time for a
sowp of brose, or a bit of bannock. G--d, I carried a cutler’s wheel for
several weeks, partly for need, and partly for disguise--there I went
bizz--bizz--whizz--zizz, at every auld wife’s door; and if ever you want
your shears sharpened, Mrs. Crosbie, I am the lad to do it for you, if
my wheel was but in order.’

‘You, must ask my leave first,’ said the provost; ‘for I have been told
you had some queer fashions of taking a kiss instead of a penny, if you
liked your customer.’

‘Come, come, provost,’ said the lady; rising, ‘if the maut gets abune
the meal with you, it is time for me to take myself away--And you will
come to my room, gentlemen, when you want a cup of tea.’

Alan Fairford was not sorry for the lady’s departure. She seemed too
much alive to the honour of the house of Redgauntlet, though only a
fourth cousin, not to be alarmed by the inquiries which he proposed
to make after the whereabout of its present head. Strange confused
suspicions arose in his mind, from his imperfect recollection of the
tale of Wandering Willie, and the idea forced itself upon him that his
friend Darsie Latimer might be the son of the unfortunate Sir Henry. But
before indulging in such speculations, the point was to discover what
had actually become of him. If he were in the hands of his uncle, might
there not exist some rivalry in fortune, or rank, which might induce so
stern a man as Redgauntlet to use unfair measures towards a youth whom
he would find himself unable to mould to his purpose? He considered
these points in silence, during several revolutions of the glasses
as they wheeled in galaxy round the bowl, waiting until the provost,
agreeably to his own proposal, should mention the subject, for which he
had expressly introduced him to Mr. Maxwell of Summertrees.

Apparently the provost had forgot his promise, or at least was in no
great haste to fulfil it. He debated with great earnestness upon the
Stamp Act, which was then impending over the American colonies, and upon
other political subjects of the day, but said not a word of Redgauntlet.
Alan soon saw that the investigation he meditated must advance, if at
all, on his own special motion, and determined to proceed accordingly.

Acting upon this resolution, he took the first opportunity afforded by
a pause in the discussion of colonial politics, to say, ‘I must remind
you, Provost Crosbie, of your kind promise to procure some intelligence
upon the subject I am so anxious about.’

‘Gadso!’ said the provost, after a moment’s hesitation, ‘it is very
true.--Mr. Maxwell, we wish to consult you on a piece of important
business. You must know indeed I think you must have heard, that the
fishermen at Brokenburn, and higher up the Solway, have made a raid upon
Quaker Geddes’s stake-nets, and levelled all with the sands.’

‘In troth I heard it, provost, and I was glad to hear the scoundrels had
so much pluck left as to right themselves against a fashion which would
make the upper heritors a sort of clocking-hens, to hatch the fish that
folk below them were to catch and eat.’

‘Well, sir,’ said Alan, ‘that is not the present point. But a young
friend of mine was with Mr. Geddes at the time this violent procedure
took place, and he has not since been heard of. Now, our friend, the
provost, thinks that you may be able to advise’--

Here he was interrupted by the provost and Summertrees speaking out
both at once, the first endeavouring to disclaim all interest in the
question, and the last to evade giving an answer.

‘Me think!’ said the provost; ‘I never thought twice about it, Mr.
Fairford; it was neither fish, nor flesh, nor salt herring of mine.’

‘And I “able to advise”!’ said Mr. Maxwell of Summertrees; ‘what the
devil can I advise you to do, excepting to send the bellman through the
town to cry your lost sheep, as they do spaniel dogs or stray ponies?’

‘With your pardon,’ said Alan, calmly, but resolutely, ‘I must ask a
more serious answer.’

‘Why, Mr. Advocate,’ answered Summertrees, ‘I thought it was your
business to give advice to the lieges, and not to take it from poor
stupid country gentlemen.’

‘If not exactly advice, it is sometimes our duty to ask questions, Mr.
Maxwell.’

‘Aye, sir, when you have your bag-wig and your gown on, we must
allow you the usual privilege of both gown and petticoat, to ask what
questions you please. But when you are out of your canonicals, the case
is altered. How come you, sir, to suppose that I have any business with
this riotous proceeding, or should know more than you do what happened
there? the question proceeds on an uncivil supposition.’

‘I will explain,’ said Alan, determined to give Mr. Maxwell no
opportunity of breaking off the conversation. ‘You are an intimate of
Mr. Redgauntlet--he is accused of having been engaged in this affray,
and of having placed under forcible restraint the person of my friend,
Darsie Latimer, a young man of property and consequence, whose fate I am
here for the express purpose of investigating. This is the plain
state of the case; and all parties concerned,--your friend, in
particular,--will have reason to be thankful for the temperate manner
in which it is my purpose to conduct the matter, if I am treated with
proportionate frankness.’

‘You have misunderstood me,’ said Maxwell, with a tone changed to
more composure; ‘I told you I was the friend of the late Sir Henry
Redgauntlet, who was executed, in 1745, at Hairibie, near Carlisle, but
I know no one who at present bears the name of Redgauntlet.’

‘You know Mr. Herries of Birrenswork,’ said Alan, smiling, ‘to whom the
name of Redgauntlet belongs?’

Maxwell darted a keen reproachful look towards the provost, but
instantly smoothed his brow, and changed his tone to that of confidence
and candour.

‘You must not be angry, Mr. Fairford, that the poor persecuted nonjurors
are a little upon the QUI VIVE when such clever young men as you are
making inquiries after us. I myself now, though I am quite out of the
scrape, and may cock my hat at the Cross as I best like, sunshine or
moonshine, have been yet so much accustomed to walk with the lap of my
cloak cast over my face, that, faith, if a redcoat walk suddenly up
to me, I wish for my wheel and whetstone again for a moment. Now
Redgauntlet, poor fellow, is far worse off--he is, you may have heard,
still under the lash of the law,--the mark of the beast is still on his
forehead, poor gentleman,--and that makes us cautious--very cautious,
which I am sure there is no occasion to be towards you, as no one of
your appearance and manners would wish to trepan a gentleman under
misfortune.’

‘On the contrary, sir,’ said Fairford, ‘I wish to afford Mr.
Redgauntlet’s friends an opportunity to get him out of the scrape, by
procuring the instant liberation of my friend Darsie Latimer. I will
engage that if he has sustained no greater bodily harm than a short
confinement, the matter may be passed over quietly, without inquiry; but
to attain this end, so desirable for the man who has committed a great
and recent infraction of the laws, which he had before grievously
offended, very speedy reparation of the wrong must be rendered.’

Maxwell seemed lost in reflection, and exchanged a glance or two, not of
the most comfortable or congratulatory kind, with his host the provost.
Fairford rose and walked about the room, to allow them an opportunity
of conversing together; for he was in hopes that the impression he
had visibly made upon Summertrees was likely to ripen into something
favourable to his purpose. They took the opportunity, and engaged in
whispers to each other, eagerly and reproachfully on the part of the
laird, while the provost answered in an embarrassed and apologetical
tone. Some broken words of the conversation reached Fairford, whose
presence they seemed to forget, as he stood at the bottom of the room,
apparently intent upon examining the figures upon a fine Indian screen,
a present to the provost from his brother, captain of a vessel in the
Company’s service. What he overheard made it evident that his errand,
and the obstinacy with which he pursued it, occasioned altercation
between the whisperers.

Maxwell at length let out the words, ‘A good fright; and so send him
home with his tail scalded, like a dog that has come a-privateering on
strange premises.’

The provost’s negative was strongly interposed--‘Not to be thought
of’--‘making bad worse’--‘my situation’--‘my utility’--‘you cannot
conceive how obstinate--just like his father’.

They then whispered more closely, and at length the provost raised his
drooping crest, and spoke in a cheerful tone. ‘Come, sit down to your
glass, Mr. Fairford; we have laid our heads thegither, and you shall see
it will not be our fault if you are not quite pleased, and Mr.
Darsie Latimer let loose to take his fiddle under his neck again. But
Summertrees thinks it will require you to put yourself into some bodily
risk, which maybe you may not be so keen of.’

‘Gentlemen,’ said Fairford, ‘I will not certainly shun any risk by which
my object may be accomplished; but I bind it on your consciences--on
yours, Mr. Maxwell, as a man of honour and a gentleman; and on yours,
provost, as a magistrate and a loyal subject, that you do not mislead me
in this matter.’

‘Nay, as for me,’ said Summertrees, ‘I will tell you the truth at
once, and fairly own that I can certainly find you the means of seeing
Redgauntlet, poor man; and that I will do, if you require it, and
conjure him also to treat you as your errand requires; but poor
Redgauntlet is much changed--indeed, to say truth, his temper never was
the best in the world; however, I will warrant you from any very great
danger.’

‘I will warrant myself from such,’ said Fairford, ‘by carrying a proper
force with me.’

‘Indeed,’ said Summertrees, ‘you will, do no such thing; for, in the
first place, do you think that we will deliver up the poor fellow into
the hands of the Philistines, when, on the contrary, my only reason for
furnishing you with the clue I am to put into your hands, is to settle
the matter amicably on all sides? And secondly, his intelligence is so
good, that were you coming near him with soldiers, or constables, or the
like, I shall answer for it, you will never lay salt on his tail.’

Fairford mused for a moment. He considered that to gain sight of this
man, and knowledge of his friend’s condition, were advantages to be
purchased at every personal risk; and he saw plainly, that were he to
take the course most safe for himself, and call in the assistance of
the law, it was clear he would either be deprived of the intelligence
necessary to guide him, or that Redgauntlet would be apprised of his
danger, and might probably leave the country, carrying his captive
along with him. He therefore repeated, ‘I put myself on your honour, Mr.
Maxwell; and I will go alone to visit your friend. I have little; doubt
I shall find him amenable to reason; and that I shall receive from him a
satisfactory account of Mr. Latimer.’

‘I have little doubt that you will,’ said Mr. Maxwell of Summertrees;
‘but still I think it will be only in the long run, and after having
sustained some delay and inconvenience. My warrandice goes no further.’

‘I will take it as it is given,’ said Alan Fairford. ‘But let me ask,
would it not be better, since you value your friend’s safety so highly
and surely would not willingly compromise mine, that the provost or you
should go with me to this man, if he is within any reasonable distance,
and try to make him hear reason?’

‘Me!--I will not go my foot’s length,’ said the provost; and that, Mr.
Alan, you may be well assured of. Mr. Redgauntlet is my wife’s fourth
cousin, that is undeniable; but were he the last of her kin and mine
both, it would ill befit my office to be communing with rebels.’

‘Aye, or drinking with nonjurors,’ said Maxwell, filling his glass. ‘I
would as soon expect; to have met Claverhouse at a field-preaching. And
as for myself, Mr. Fairford, I cannot go, for just the opposite reason.
It would be INFRA DIG. in the provost of this most flourishing and loyal
town to associate with Redgauntlet; and for me it would be NOSCITUR A
SOCIO. There would be post to London, with the tidings that two such
Jacobites as Redgauntlet and I had met on a braeside--the Habeas Corpus
would be suspended--Fame would sound a charge from Carlisle to the
Land’s End--and who knows but the very wind of the rumour might blow my
estate from between my fingers, and my body over Errickstane-brae again?
No, no; bide a gliff--I will go into the provost’s closet, and write a
letter to Redgauntlet, and direct you how to deliver it.’

‘There is pen and ink in the office,’ said the provost, pointing to the
door of an inner apartment, in which he had his walnut-tree desk and
east-country cabinet.

‘A pen that can write, I hope?’ said the old laird.

‘It can write and spell baith in right hands,’ answered the provost, as
the laird retired and shut the door behind him.





NARRATIVE OF ALAN FAIRFORD, CONTINUED

The room was no sooner deprived of Mr. Maxwell of Summertrees’s
presence, than the provost looked very warily above, beneath, and around
the apartment, hitched his chair towards that of his remaining guest,
and began to speak In a whisper which could not have startled ‘the
smallest mouse that creeps on floor.’

‘Mr. Fairford,’ said he, ‘you are a good lad; and, what is more, you are
my auld friend your father’s son. Your father has been agent for this
burgh for years, and has a good deal to say with the council; so there
have been a sort of obligations between him and me; it may have been now
on this side and now on that; but obligations there have been. I am but
a plain man, Mr. Fairford; but I hope you understand me?’

‘I believe you mean me well, provost; and I am sure,’ replied Fairford,
‘you can never better show your kindness than on this occasion.’

‘That’s it--that’s the very point I would be at, Mr. Alan,’ replied the
provost; ‘besides, I am, as becomes well my situation, a stanch friend
to kirk and king, meaning this present establishment in church and
state; and so, as I was saying, you may command my best--advice.’

‘I hope for your assistance and co-operation also,’ said the youth.

‘Certainly, certainly,’ said the wary magistrate. ‘Well, now, you see
one may love the kirk, and yet not ride on the rigging of it; and one
may love the king, and yet not be cramming him eternally down the throat
of the unhappy folk that may chance to like another king better. I have
friends and connexions among them, Mr. Fairford, as your father may have
clients--they are flesh and blood like ourselves, these poor Jacobite
bodies--sons of Adam and Eve, after all; and therefore--I hope you
understand me?--I am a plain-spoken man.’

‘I am afraid I do not quite understand you,’ said Fairford; ‘and if you
have anything to say to me in private, my dear provost, you had better
come quickly out with it, for the Laird of Summertrees must finish his
letter in a minute or two.’

‘Not a bit, man--Pate is a lang-headed fellow, but his pen does not
clear the paper as his greyhound does the Tinwald-furs. I gave him
a wipe about that, if you noticed; I can say anything to
Pate-in-Peril--Indeed, he is my wife’s near kinsman.’

‘But your advice, provost,’ said Alan, who perceived that, like a shy
horse, the worthy magistrate always started off from his own purpose
just when he seemed approaching to it.

‘Weel, you shall have it in plain terms, for I am a plain man. Ye see,
we will suppose that any friend like yourself were in the deepest hole
of the Nith, sand making a sprattle for your life. Now, you see, such
being the case, I have little chance of helping you, being a fat,
short-armed man, and no swimmer, and what would be the use of my jumping
in after you?’

‘I understand you, I think,’ said Alan Fairford. ‘You think that Darsie
Latimer is in danger of his life?’

‘Me!--I think nothing about it, Mr. Alan; but if he were, as I trust he
is not, he is nae drap’s blood akin to you, Mr. Alan.’

‘But here your friend, Summertrees,’ said the young lawyer, ‘offers me a
letter to this Redgauntlet of yours--What say you to that?’

‘Me!’ ejaculated the provost, ‘me, Mr. Alan? I say neither buff nor
stye to it--But ye dinna ken what it is to look a Redgauntlet in the
face;--better try my wife, who is but a fourth cousin, before ye venture
on the laird himself--just say something about the Revolution, and see
what a look she can gie you.’

I shall leave you to stand all the shots from that battery, provost.’
replied Fairford. ‘But speak out like a man--Do you think Summertrees
means fairly by me?’

‘Fairly--he is just coming--fairly? I am a plain man, Mr. Fairford--but
ye said FAIRLY?’

‘I do so,’ replied Alan, ‘and it is of importance to me to know, and
to you to tell me if such is the case; for if you do not, you may be an
accomplice to murder before the fact, and that under circumstances which
may bring it near to murder under trust.’

‘Murder!--who spoke of murder?’ said the provost; no danger of that, Mr.
Alan--only, if I were you--to speak my plain mind’--Here he approached
his mouth to the ear of the young lawyer, and, after another acute pang
of travail, was safely delivered of his advice in the following abrupt
words:--‘Take a keek into Pate’s letter before ye deliver it.’

Fairford started, looked the provost hard in the face, and was silent;
while Mr. Crosbie, with the self-approbation of one who has at length
brought himself to the discharge of a great duty, at the expense of a
considerable sacrifice, nodded and winked to Alan, as if enforcing his
advice; and then swallowing a large glass of punch, concluded, with
the sigh of a man released from a heavy burden, ‘I am a plain man, Mr.
Fairford.’

‘A plain man?’ said Maxwell, who entered the room at that moment, with
the letter in his hand,--‘Provost, I never heard you make use of the
word but when you had some sly turn of your own to work out.’

The provost looked silly enough, and the Laird of Summertrees directed
a keen and suspicious glance upon Alan Fairford, who sustained it with
professional intrepidity.--There was a moment’s pause.

‘I was trying,’ said the provost, ‘to dissuade our young friend from his
wildgoose expedition.’

‘And I,’ said Fairford, ‘am determined to go through with it. Trusting
myself to you, Mr. Maxwell, I conceive that I rely, as I before said, on
the word of a gentleman.’

‘I will warrant you,’ said Maxwell, ‘from all serious consequences--some
inconveniences you must look to suffer.’

‘To these I shall be resigned,’ said Fairford, ‘and stand prepared to
run my risk.’

‘Well then,’ said Summertrees, ‘you must go’--

‘I will leave you to yourselves, gentlemen,’ said the provost, rising;
‘when you have done with your crack, you will find me at my wife’s
tea-table.’

‘And a more accomplished old woman never drank catlap,’ said Maxwell,
as he shut the door; ‘the last word has him, speak it who will--and yet
because he is a whillywhaw body, and has a plausible tongue of his own,
and is well enough connected, and especially because nobody could ever
find out whether he is Whig or Tory, this is the third time they
have made him provost!--But to the matter in hand. This letter, Mr.
Fairford,’ putting a sealed one into his hand, ‘is addressed, you
observe, to Mr. H--of B--, and contains your credentials for that
gentlemen, who is also known by his family name of Redgauntlet, but
less frequently addressed by it, because it is mentioned something
invidiously in a certain Act of Parliament. I have little doubt he will
assure you of your friend’s safety, and in a short time place him at
freedom--that is, supposing him under present restraint. But the point
is, to discover where he is--and, before you are made acquainted with
this necessary part of the business, you must give me your assurance of
honour that you will acquaint no one, either by word or letter, with the
expedition which you now propose to yourself.’

‘How, sir?’ answered Alan; ‘can you expect that I will not take the
precaution of informing some person of the route I am about to take,
that in case of accident it may be known where I am, and with what
purpose I have gone thither?’

‘And can you expect,’ answered Maxwell, in the same tone, ‘that I am to
place my friend’s safety, not merely in your hands, but in those of any
person you may choose to confide in, and who may use the knowledge to
his destruction? Na--na--I have pledged my word for your safety, and you
must give me yours to be private in the matter--giff-gaff, you know.’

Alan Fairford could not help thinking that this obligation to secrecy
gave a new and suspicious colouring to the whole transaction; but,
considering that his friend’s release might depend upon his accepting
the condition, he gave it in the terms proposed, and with the purpose of
abiding by it.

‘And now, sir,’ he said, ‘whither am I to proceed with this letter? Is
Mr. Herries at Brokenburn?’

‘He is not; I do not think he will come thither again until the business
of the stake-nets be hushed up, nor would I advise him to do so--the
Quakers, with all their demureness, can bear malice as long as other
folk; and though I have not the prudence of Mr. Provost, who refuses to
ken where his friends are concealed during adversity, lest, perchance,
he should be asked to contribute to their relief, yet I do not think it
necessary or prudent to inquire into Redgauntlet’s wanderings, poor man,
but wish to remain at perfect freedom to answer, if asked at, that I
ken nothing of the matter. You must, then, go to old Tom Trumbull’s at
Annan,--Tam Turnpenny, as they call him,--and he is sure either to know
where Redgauntlet is himself, or to find some one who can give a shrewd
guess. But you must attend that old Turnpenny will answer no question on
such a subject without you give him the passport, which at present you
must do, by asking him the age of the moon; if he answers, “Not light
enough to land a cargo,” you are to answer, “Then plague on Aberdeen
Almanacks,” and upon that he will hold free intercourse with you.
And now, I would advise you to lose no time, for the parole is often
changed--and take care of yourself among these moonlight lads, for laws
and lawyers do not stand very high in their favour.’

‘I will set out this instant,’ said the young barrister; ‘I will but bid
the provost and Mrs. Crosbie farewell, and then get on horseback so soon
as the ostler of the George Inn can saddle him;--as for the smugglers,
I am neither gauger nor supervisor, and, like the man who met the devil,
if they have nothing to say to me, I have nothing to say to them.’

‘You are a mettled young man,’ said Summertrees, evidently with
increasing goodwill, on observing an alertness and contempt of
danger, which perhaps he did not expect from Alan’s appearance and
profession,--‘a very mettled young fellow indeed! and it is almost a
pity’--Here he stopped abort.

‘What is a pity?’ said Fairford.

‘It is almost a pity that I cannot go with you myself, or at least send
a trusty guide.’

They walked together to the bedchamber of Mrs. Crosbie, for it was in
that asylum that the ladies of the period dispensed their tea, when the
parlour was occupied by the punch-bowl.

‘You have been good bairns to-night, gentlemen,’ said Mrs. Crosbie; ‘I
am afraid, Summertrees, that the provost has given you a bad browst; you
are not used to quit the lee-side of the punch-bowl in such a hurry. I
say nothing to you, Mr. Fairford, for you are too young a man yet for
stoup and bicker; but I hope you will not tell the Edinburgh fine folk
that the provost has scrimped you of your cogie, as the sang says?’

‘I am much obliged for the provost’s kindness, and yours, madam,’
replied Alan; ‘but the truth is, I have still a long ride before me this
evening and the sooner I am on horse-back the better.’

‘This evening?’ said the provost, anxiously; ‘had you not better take
daylight with you to-morrow morning?’

‘Mr. Fairford will ride as well in the cool of the evening,’ said
Summertrees, taking the word out of Alan’s mouth.

The provost said no more, nor did his wife ask any questions, nor
testify any surprise at the suddenness of their guest’s departure.

Having drunk tea, Alan Fairford took leave with the usual ceremony.
The Laird of Summertrees seemed studious to prevent any further
communication between him and the provost, and remained lounging on
the landing-place of the stair while they made their adieus--heard the
provost ask if Alan proposed a speedy return, and the latter reply that
his stay was uncertain, and witnessed the parting shake of the hand,
which, with a pressure more warm than usual, and a tremulous, ‘God bless
and prosper you!’ Mr. Crosbie bestowed on his young friend. Maxwell even
strolled with Fairford as far as the George, although resisting all
his attempts at further inquiry into the affairs of Redgauntlet, and
referring him to Tom Trumbull, alias Turnpenny, for the particulars
which he might find it necessary to inquire into.

At length Alan’s hack was produced--an animal long in neck, and high
in bone, accoutred with a pair of saddle-bags containing the rider’s
travelling wardrobe. Proudly surmounting his small stock of necessaries,
and no way ashamed of a mode of travelling which a modern Mr.
Silvertongue would consider as the last of degradations, Alan Fairford
took leave of the old Jacobite, Pate-in-Peril, and set forward on the
road to the loyal burgh of Annan. His reflections during his ride were
none of the most pleasant. He could not disguise from himself that he
was venturing rather too rashly into the power of outlawed and desperate
persons; for with such only, a man in the situation of Redgauntlet could
be supposed to associate. There were other grounds for apprehension,
Several marks of intelligence betwixt Mrs. Crosbie and the Laird of
Summertrees had not escaped Alan’s acute observation; and it was plain
that the provost’s inclinations towards him, which he believed to be
sincere and good, were not firm enough to withstand the influence of
this league between his wife and friend. The provost’s adieus, like
Macbeth’s amen, had stuck in his throat, and seemed to intimate that he
apprehended more than he dared give utterance to.

Laying all these matters together, Alan thought, with no little anxiety
on the celebrated lines of Shakespeare,

                                  -- A drop,
  That in the ocean seeks another drop, &c.

But pertinacity was a strong feature in the young lawyer’s character.
He was, and always had been, totally unlike the ‘horse hot at hand,’ who
tires before noon through his own over eager exertions in the beginning
of the day. On the contrary, his first efforts seemed frequently
inadequate to accomplishing his purpose, whatever that for the time
might be; and it was only as the difficulties of the task increased,
that his mind seemed to acquire the energy necessary to combat and
subdue them. If, therefore, he went anxiously forward upon his uncertain
and perilous expedition, the reader must acquit him of all idea, even
in a passing thought, of the possibility of abandoning his search, and
resigning Darsie Latimer to his destiny.

A couple of hours’ riding brought him to the little town of Annan,
situated on the shores of the Solway, between eight and nine o’clock.
The sun had set, but the day was not yet ended; and when he had alighted
and seen his horse properly cared for at the principal inn of the place,
he was readily directed to Mr. Maxwell’s friend, old Tom Trumbull, with
whom everybody seemed well acquainted. He endeavoured to fish out from
the lad that acted as a guide, something of this man’s situation and
profession; but the general expressions of ‘a very decent man’--‘a very
honest body’--‘weel to pass in the world,’ and such like, were all that
could be extracted from him; and while Fairford was following up the
investigation with closer interrogatories, the lad put an end to them by
knocking at the door of Mr. Trumbull, whose decent dwelling was a little
distance from the town, and considerably nearer to the sea. It was one
of a little row of houses running down to the waterside, and having
gardens and other accommodations behind. There was heard within
the uplifting of a Scottish psalm; and the boy saying, ‘They are at
exercise, sir,’ gave intimation they might not be admitted till prayers
were over.

When, however, Fairford repeated the summons with the end of his whip,
the singing ceased, and Mr. Trumbull himself, with his psalm-book in his
hand, kept open by the insertion of his forefinger between the leaves,
came to demand the meaning of this unseasonable interruption.

Nothing could be more different than his whole appearance seemed to be
from the confidant of a desperate man, and the associate of outlaws in
their unlawful enterprises. He was a tall, thin, bony figure, with white
hair combed straight down on each side of his face, and an iron-grey hue
of complexion; where the lines, or rather, as Quin said of Macklin, the
cordage, of his countenance were so sternly adapted to a devotional and
even ascetic expression, that they left no room for any indication of
reckless daring or sly dissimulation. In short, Trumbull appeared a
perfect specimen of the rigid old Covenanter, who said only what he
thought right, acted on no other principle but that of duty, and, if he
committed errors, did so under the full impression that he was serving
God rather than man.

‘Do you want me, sir?’ he said to Fairford, whose guide had slunk to
the rear, as if to escape the rebuke of the severe old man,--‘We were
engaged, and it is the Saturday night.’

Alan Fairford’s preconceptions were so much deranged by this man’s
appearance and manner, that he stood for a moment bewildered, and would
as soon have thought of giving a cant password to a clergyman descending
from the pulpit, as to the respectable father of a family just
interrupted in his prayers for and with the objects of his care. Hastily
concluding Mr. Maxwell had passed some idle jest on him, or rather that
he had mistaken the person to whom he was directed, he asked if he spoke
to Mr. Trumbull.

‘To Thomas Trumbull,’ answered the old man--‘What may be your business,
sir?’ And he glanced his eye to the book he held in his hand, with a
sigh like that of a saint desirous of dissolution.

‘Do you know Mr. Maxwell of Summertrees?’ said Fairford.

‘I have heard of such a gentleman in the country-side, but have no
acquaintance with him,’ answered Mr. Trumbull; ‘he is, as I have heard,
a Papist; for the whore that sitteth on the seven hills ceaseth not yet
to pour forth the cup of her abomination on these parts.’

‘Yet he directed me hither, my good friend,’ said Alan. ‘Is there
another of your name in this town of Annan?’

‘None,’ replied Mr. Trumbull, ‘since my worthy father was removed; he
was indeed a shining light.--I wish you good even, sir.’

‘Stay one single instant,’ said Fairford; ‘this is a matter of life and
death.’

‘Not more than the casting the burden of our sins where they should be
laid,’ said Thomas Trumbull, about to shut the door in the inquirer’s
face.

‘Do you know,’ said Alan Fairford, ‘the Laird of Redgauntlet?’

‘Now Heaven defend me from treason and rebellion!’ exclaimed Trumbull.
‘Young gentleman, you are importunate. I live here among my own people,
and do not consort with Jacobites and mass-mongers.’

He seemed about to shut the door, but did NOT shut it, a circumstance
which did not escape Alan’s notice.

‘Mr. Redgauntlet is sometimes,’ he said, ‘called Herries of Birrenswork;
perhaps you may know him under that name.’

‘Friend, you are uncivil,’ answered Mr. Trumbull; ‘honest men have
enough to do to keep one name undefiled. I ken nothing about those who
have two. Good even to you, friend.’

He was now about to slam the door in his visitor’s face without
further ceremony, when Alan, who had observed symptoms that the name
of Redgauntlet did not seem altogether so indifferent to him as he
pretended, arrested his purpose by saying, in a low voice, ‘At least you
can tell me what age the moon is?’

The old man started, as if from a trance, and before answering, surveyed
the querist with a keen penetrating glance, which seemed to say, ‘Are
you really in possession of this key to my confidence, or do you speak
from mere accident?’

To this keen look of scrutiny, Fairford replied by a smile of
intelligence.

The iron muscles of the old man’s face did not, however, relax, as he
dropped, in a careless manner, the countersign, ‘Not light enough to
land a cargo.’

‘Then plague of all Aberdeen Almanacks!’

‘And plague of all fools that waste time,’ said Thomas Trumbull, ‘Could
you not have said as much at first? And standing wasting time, and
encouraging; lookers-on, in the open street too? Come in by--in by.’

He drew his visitor into the dark entrance of the house, and shut
the door carefully; then putting his head into an apartment which the
murmurs within announced to be filled with the family, he said aloud, ‘A
work of necessity and mercy--Malachi, take the book--You will sing six
double verses of the hundred and nineteen-and you may lecture out of the
Lamentations. And, Malachi,’--this he said in an undertone,--‘see you
give them a a creed of doctrine that will last them till I come back; or
else these inconsiderate lads will be out of the house, and away to the
publics, wasting their precious time, and, it may be, putting themselves
in the way of missing the morning tide.’

An inarticulate answer from within intimated Malachi’s acquiescence in
the commands imposed; and, Mr. Trumbull, shutting the door, muttered
something about fast bind, fast find, turned the key, and put it into
his pocket; and then bidding his visitor have a care of his steps, and
make no noise, he led him through the house, and out at a back-door,
into a little garden. Here a plaited alley conducted them, without
the possibility of their being seen by any neighbour, to a door in the
garden-wall, which being opened, proved to be a private entrance into
a three-stalled stable; in one of which was a horse, that whinnied on
their entrance. ‘Hush, hush!’ cried the old man, and presently seconded
his exhortations to silence by throwing a handful of corn into the
manger, and the horse soon converted his acknowledgement of their
presence into the usual sound of munching and grinding his provender.

As the light was now failing fast, the old man, with much more alertness
than might have been expected from the rigidity of his figure, closed
the window-shutters in an instant, produced phosphorus and matches,
and lighted a stable-lantern, which he placed on the corn-bin, and then
addressed Fairford. ‘We are private here, young man; and as some time
has been wasted already, you will be so kind as to tell me what is your
errand. Is it about the way of business, or the other job?’

‘My business with you, Mr. Trumbull, is to request you will find me the
means of delivering this letter, from Mr. Maxwell of Summertrees to the
Laird of Redgauntlet.’

‘Humph--fashious job! Pate Maxwell will still be the auld man--always
Pate-in-Peril--Craig-in-Peril, for what I know. Let me see the letter
from him.’

He examined it with much care, turning it up and down, and looking at
the seal very attentively. ‘All’s right, I see; it has the private mark
for haste and speed. I bless my Maker that I am no great man, or great
man’s fellow; and so I think no more of these passages than just to help
them forward in the way of business. You are an utter stranger in these
parts, I warrant?’

Fairford answered in the affirmative.

‘Aye--I never saw them make a wiser choice--I must call some one to
direct you what to do--Stay, we must go to him, I believe. You are well
recommended to me, friend, and doubtless trusty; otherwise you may
see more than I would like to show, or am in the use of showing in the
common line of business.’

Saying this, he placed his lantern on the ground, beside the post of one
of the empty stalls, drew up a small spring bolt which secured it to
the floor, and then forcing the post to one side, discovered a small
trap-door. ‘Follow me,’ he said, and dived into the subterranean descent
to which this secret aperture gave access.

Fairford plunged after him, not without apprehensions of more kinds than
one, but still resolved to prosecute the adventure.

The descent, which was not above six feet, led to a very narrow passage,
which seemed to have been constructed for the precise purpose of
excluding every one who chanced to be an inch more in girth than was his
conductor. A small vaulted room, of about eight feet square, received
them at the end of this lane. Here Mr. Trumbull left Fairford alone, and
returned for an instant, as he said, to shut his concealed trap-door.

Fairford liked not his departure, as it left him in utter darkness;
besides that his breathing was much affected by a strong and stifling
smell of spirits, and other articles of a savour more powerful than
agreeable to the lungs. He was very glad, therefore, when he heard the
returning steps of Mr. Trumbull, who, when once more by his side, opened
a strong though narrow door in the wall, and conveyed Fairford into
an immense magazine of spirit-casks, and other articles of contraband
trade.

There was a small, light at the end of this range of well-stocked
subterranean vaults, which, upon a low whistle, began to flicker and
move towards them. An undefined figure, holding a dark lantern, with the
light averted, approached them, whom Mr. Trumbull thus addressed:--‘Why
were you not at worship, Job; and this Saturday at e’en?’

‘Swanston was loading the JENNY, sir; and I stayed to serve out the
article.’

‘True--a work of necessity, and in the way of business. Does the JUMPING
JENNY sail this tide?’

‘Aye, aye, sir; she sails for’--

‘I did not ask you WHERE she sailed for, Job,’ said the old gentleman,
interrupting him. ‘I thank my Maker, I know nothing of their incomings
or outgoings. I sell my article fairly and in the ordinary way of
business; and I wash my hands of everything else. But what I wished to
know is, whether the gentleman called the Laird of the Solway Lakes is
on the other side of the Border even now?’

‘Aye, aye,’ said Job, ‘the laird is something in my own line, you
know--a little contraband or so, There is a statute for him--But no
matter; he took the sands after the splore at the Quaker’s fish-traps
yonder; for he has a leal heart, the laird, and is always true to the
country-side. But avast--is all snug here?’

So saying, he suddenly turned on Alan Fairford the light side of the
lantern he carried, who, by the transient gleam which it threw in
passing on the man who bore it, saw a huge figure, upwards of six
feet high, with a rough hairy cap on his head, and a set of features
corresponding to his bulky frame. He thought also he observed pistols at
his belt.

‘I will answer for this gentleman,’ said Mr. Trumbull; ‘he must be
brought to speech of the laird.’

‘That will be kittle steering,’ said the subordinate personage; ‘for I
understood that the laird and his folk were no sooner on the other
side than the land-sharks were on them, and some mounted lobsters from
Carlisle; and so they were obliged to split and squander. There are new
brooms out to sweep the country of them, they say; for the brush was a
hard one; and they say there was a lad drowned;--he was not one of the
laird’s gang, so there was the less matter.’

‘Peace! prithee, peace, Job Rutledge,’ said honest, pacific Mr.
Trumbull. ‘I wish thou couldst remember, man, that I desire to know
nothing of your roars and splores, your brooms and brushes. I dwell here
among my own people; and I sell my commodity to him who comes in the
way of business; and so wash my hands of all consequences, as becomes
a quiet subject and an honest man. I never take payment, save in ready
money.’

‘Aye, aye,’ muttered he with the lantern, ‘your worship, Mr. Trumbull,
understands that in the way of business.’

‘Well, I hope you will one day know, Job,’ answered Mr. Trumbull,--‘the
comfort of a conscience void of offence, and that fears neither gauger
nor collector, neither excise nor customs. The business is to pass this
gentleman to Cumberland upon earnest business, and to procure him speech
with the Laird of the Solway Lakes--I suppose that can be done? Now I
think Nanty Ewart, if he sails with the brig this morning tide, is the
man to set him forward.’

‘Aye, aye, truly is he,’ said Job; ‘never man knew the Border, dale and
fell, pasture and ploughland, better than Nanty; and he can always bring
him to the laird, too, if you are sure the gentleman’s right. But indeed
that’s his own look-out; for were he the best man in Scotland, and the
chairman of the d--d Board to boot, and had fifty men at his back, he
were as well not visit the laird for anything but good. As for Nanty, he
is word and blow, a d--d deal fiercer than Cristie Nixon that they keep
such a din about. I have seen them both tried, by’--

Fairford now found himself called upon to say something; yet his
feelings, upon finding himself thus completely in the power of a canting
hypocrite, and of his retainer, who had so much the air of a determined
ruffian, joined to the strong and abominable fume which they snuffed up
with indifference, while it almost deprived him of respiration, combined
to render utterance difficult. He stated, however, that he had no evil
intentions towards the laird, as they called him, but was only the
bearer of a letter to him on particular business, from Mr. Maxwell of
Summertrees.

‘Aye, aye,’ said Job, ‘that may be well enough; and if Mr. Trumbull is
satisfied that the service is right, why, we will give you a cast in
the JUMPING JENNY this tide, and Nanty Ewart will put you on a way of
finding the laird, I warrant you.’

‘I may for the present return, I presume, to the inn where I left my
horse?’ said Fairford.

‘With pardon,’ replied Mr. Trumbull, ‘you have been ower far ben with
us for that; but Job will take you to a place where you may sleep
rough till he calls you. I will bring you what little baggage you can
need--for those who go on such errands must not be dainty. I will myself
see after your horse, for a merciful man is merciful to his beast--a
matter too often forgotten in our way of business.’

‘Why, Master Trumbull,’ replied Job, ‘you know that when we are chased,
it’s no time to shorten sail, and so the boys do ride whip and spur.’
He stopped in his speech, observing the old man had vanished through
the door by which he had entered--‘That’s always the way with old
Turnpenny,’ he said to Fairford; ‘he cares for nothing of the trade but
the profit--now, d--me, if I don’t think the fun of it is better worth
while. But come along, my fine chap; I must stow you away in safety
until it is time to go aboard.’




NARRATIVE OF ALAN FAIRFORD, CONTINUED

Fairford followed his gruff guide among a labyrinth of barrels and
puncheons, on which he had more than once like to have broken his nose,
and from thence into what, by the glimpse of the passing lantern upon a
desk and writing materials, seemed to be a small office for the
dispatch of business. Here there appeared no exit; but the smuggler, or
smuggler’s ally, availing himself of a ladder, removed an old picture,
which showed a door about seven feet from the ground, and Fairford,
still following Job, was involved in another tortuous and dark passage,
which involuntarily reminded him of Peter Peebles’s lawsuit. At the end
of this labyrinth, when he had little guess where he had been conducted,
and was, according to the French phrase, totally DESORIENTE, Job
suddenly set down the lantern, and availing himself of the flame to
light two candles which stood on the table, asked if Alan would choose
anything to eat, recommending, at all events, a slug of brandy to
keep out the night air. Fairford declined both, but inquired after his
baggage.

‘The old master will take care of that himself,’ said Job Rutledge; and
drawing back in the direction in which he had entered, he vanished from
the farther end of the apartment, by a mode which the candles, still
shedding an imperfect light, gave Alan no means of ascertaining. Thus
the adventurous young lawyer was left alone in the apartment to which he
had been conducted by so singular a passage.

In this condition, it was Alan’s first employment to survey, with some
accuracy, the place where he was; and accordingly, having trimmed the
lights, he walked slowly round the apartment, examining its appearance
and dimensions. It seemed to be such a small dining-parlour as is
usually found in the house of the better class of artisans, shopkeepers,
and such persons, having a recess at the upper end, and the usual
furniture of an ordinary description. He found a door, which he
endeavoured to open, but it was locked on the outside. A corresponding
door on the same side of the apartment admitted him into a closet, upon
the front shelves of which were punch-bowls, glasses, tea-cups, and the
like, while on one side was hung a horseman’s greatcoat of the coarsest
materials, with two great horse-pistols peeping out of the pocket,
and on the floor stood a pair of well-spattered jack-boots, the usual
equipment of the time, at least for long journeys.

Not greatly liking the contents of the closet, Alan Fairford shut the
door, and resumed his scrutiny round the walls of the apartment, in
order to discover the mode of Job Rutledge’s retreat. The secret passage
was, however, too artificially concealed, and the young lawyer had
nothing better to do than to meditate on the singularity of his present
situation. He had long known that the excise laws had occasioned an
active contraband trade betwixt Scotland and England, which then, as
now, existed, and will continue to exist until the utter abolition of
the wretched system which establishes an inequality of duties betwixt
the different parts of the same kingdom; a system, be it said in
passing, mightily resembling the conduct of a pugilist, who should tie
up one arm that he might fight the better with the other. But Fairford
was unprepared for the expensive and regular establishments by which the
illicit traffic was carried on, and could not have conceived that the
capital employed in it should have been adequate to the erection of
these extensive buildings, with all their contrivances for secrecy of
communication. He was musing on these circumstances, not without some
anxiety for the progress of his own journey, when suddenly, as he
lifted his eyes, he discovered old Mr. Trumbull at the upper end of the
apartment, bearing in one hand a small bundle, in the other his dark
lantern, the light of which, as he advanced, he directed full upon
Fairford’s countenance.

Though such an apparition was exactly what he expected, yet he did
not see the grim, stern old man present himself thus suddenly without
emotion; especially when he recollected, what to a youth of his pious
education was peculiarly shocking, that the grizzled hypocrite was
probably that instant arisen from his knees to Heaven, for the purpose
of engaging in the mysterious transactions of a desperate and illegal
trade.

The old man, accustomed to judge with ready sharpness of the physiognomy
of those with whom he had business, did not fail to remark something
like agitation in Fairford’s demeanour. ‘Have ye taken the rue?’ said
he. ‘Will ye take the sheaf from the mare, and give up the venture?’

‘Never!’ said Fairford, firmly, stimulated at once by his natural
spirit, and the recollection of his friend; ‘never, while I have life
and strength to follow it out!’

‘I have brought you,’ said Trumbull, ‘a clean shirt, and some stockings,
which is all the baggage you can conveniently carry, and I will cause
one of the lads lend you a horseman’s coat, for it is ill sailing or
riding without one; and, touching your valise, it will be as safe in
my poor house, were it full of the gold of Ophir, as if it were in the
depth of the mine.’ ‘I have no doubt of it,’ said Fairford.

‘And now,’ said Trumbull, again, ‘I pray you to tell me by what name I
am to name you to Nanty (which is Antony) Ewart?’

‘By the name of Alan Fairford,’ answered the young lawyer.

‘But that,’ said Mr. Trumbull, in reply, ‘is your own proper name and
surname.’

‘And what other should I give?’ said the young man; ‘do you think I
have any occasion for an alias? And, besides, Mr. Trumbull,’ added Alan,
thinking a little raillery might intimate confidence of spirit, ‘you
blessed yourself, but a little while since, that you had no acquaintance
with those who defiled their names so far as to be obliged to change
them.’

‘True, very true,’ said Mr. Trumbull; ‘nevertheless, young man, my grey
hairs stand unreproved in this matter; for, in my line of business, when
I sit under my vine and my fig-tree, exchanging the strong waters of the
north for the gold which is the price thereof, I have, I thank Heaven,
no disguises to keep with any man, and wear my own name of Thomas
Trumbull, without any chance that the same may be polluted. Whereas,
thou, who art to journey in miry ways, and amongst a strange people,
mayst do well to have two names, as thou hast two shirts, the one to
keep the other clean.’

Here he emitted a chuckling grunt, which lasted for two vibrations of
the pendulum exactly, and was the only approach towards laughter in
which old Turnpenny, as he was nicknamed, was ever known to indulge.

‘You are witty, Mr. Trumbull,’ said Fairford; ‘but jests are no
arguments--I shall keep my own name.’

‘At your own pleasure,’ said the merchant; ‘there is but one name
which,’ &c. &c, &c.

We will not follow the hypocrite through the impious cant which he
added, in order to close the subject.

Alan followed him, in silent abhorrence, to the recess in which the
beaufet was placed, and which was so artificially made as to conceal
another of those traps with which the whole building abounded. This
concealment admitted them to the same winding passage by which the young
lawyer had been brought thither. The path which they now took amid
these mazes, differed from the direction in which he had been guided
by Rutledge. It led upwards, and terminated beneath a garret window.
Trumbull opened it, and with more agility than his age promised,
clambered out upon the leads. If Fairford’s journey had been hitherto in
a stifled and subterranean atmosphere, it was now open, lofty, and airy
enough; for he had to follow his guide over leads and slates, which
the old smuggler traversed with the dexterity of a cat. It is true, his
course was facilitated by knowing exactly where certain stepping-places
and holdfasts were placed, of which Fairford could not so readily avail
himself; but, after a difficult and somewhat perilous progress along
the roofs of two or three houses, they at length descended by a skylight
into a garret room, and from thence by the stairs into a public-house;
for such it appeared, by the ringing of bells, whistling for waiters and
attendance, bawling of ‘House, house, here!’ chorus of sea songs, and
the like noises.

Having descended to the second story, and entered a room there in which
there was a light, old Mr. Trumbull rang the bell of the apartment
thrice, with an interval betwixt each, during which he told deliberately
the number twenty. Immediately after the third ringing the landlord
appeared, with stealthy step, and an appearance of mystery on his buxom
visage. He greeted Mr. Trumbull, who was his landlord as it proved, with
great respect, and expressed some surprise at seeing him so late, as he
termed it, ‘on Saturday e’en.’

‘And I, Robin Hastie,’ said the landlord to the tenant, am more
surprised than pleased, to hear sae muckle din in your house, Robie, so
near the honourable Sabbath; and I must mind you that it is contravening
the terms of your tack, whilk stipulates that you should shut your
public on Saturday at nine o’clock, at latest.’

‘Yes, sir,’ said Robin Hastie, no way alarmed at the gravity of the
rebuke, ‘but you must take tent that I have admitted naebody but you,
Mr. Trumbull (who by the way admitted yoursell), since nine o’clock for
the most of the folk have been here for several hours about the lading,
and so on, of the brig. It is not full tide yet, and I cannot put the
men out into the street. If I did, they would go to some other public,
and their souls would be nane the better, and my purse muckle the waur;
for how am I to pay the rent if I do not sell the liquor?’

‘Nay, then,’ said Thomas Trumbull, ‘if it is a work of necessity, and
in the honest independent way of business, no doubt there is balm in
Gilead. But prithee, Robin, wilt thou see if Nanty Ewart be, as is most
likely, amongst these unhappy topers; and if so, let him step this way
cannily, and speak to me and this young gentleman. And it’s dry talking,
Robin--you must minister to us a bowl of punch--ye ken my gage.’

‘From a mutchkin to a gallon, I ken your honour’s taste, Mr. Thomas
Trumbull,’ said mine host; ‘and ye shall hang me over the signpost if
there be a drap mair lemon or a curn less sugar than just suits you.
There are three of you--you will be for the auld Scots peremptory
pint-stoup for the success of the voyage?’ [The Scottish pint of liquid
measure comprehends four English measures of the same denomination. The
jest is well known of my poor countryman, who, driven to extremity by
the raillery of the Southern, on the small denomination of the Scottish
coin, at length answered, ‘Aye, aye! But the deil tak them that has the
LEAST PINT-STOUP.’]

‘Better pray for it than drink for it, Robin,’ said Mr. Trumbull. ‘Yours
is a dangerous trade, Robin; it hurts mony a ane--baith host and guest.
But ye will get the blue bowl, Robin--the blue bowl--that will sloken
all their drouth, and prevent the sinful repetition of whipping for
an eke of a Saturday at e’en. Aye, Robin, it is a pity of Nanty
Ewart--Nanty likes the turning up of his little finger unco weel, and we
maunna stint him, Robin, so as we leave him sense to steer by.’

‘Nanty Ewart could steer through the Pentland Firth though he were as
drunk as the Baltic Ocean,’ said Robin Hastie; and instantly tripping
downstairs, he speedily returned with the materials for what he called
his BROWST, which consisted of two English quarts of spirits, in a huge
blue bowl, with all the ingredients for punch in the same formidable
proportion. At the same time he introduced Mr. Antony or Nanty Ewart,
whose person, although he was a good deal flustered with liquor,
was different from what Fairford expected. His dress was what is
emphatically termed the shabby genteel--a frock with tarnished lace--a
small cocked hat, ornamented in a similar way--a scarlet waistcoat, with
faded embroidery, breeches of the same, with silver knee-bands, and he
wore a smart hanger and a pair of pistols in a sullied swordbelt.

‘Here I come, patron,’ he said, shaking hands with Mr. Trumbull. ‘Well,
I see you have got some grog aboard.’

‘It is not my custom, Mr. Ewart,’ said the old gentleman, ‘as you well
know, to become a chamberer or carouser thus late on Saturday at e’en;
but I wanted to recommend to your attention a young friend of ours,
that is going upon a something particular journey, with a letter to our
friend the Laird from Pate-in-Peril, as they call him.’

‘Aye--indeed?--he must be in high trust for so young a gentleman. I wish
you joy, sir,’ bowing to Fairford. ‘By’r lady, as Shakespeare says, you
are bringing up a neck for a fair end. Come, patron, we will drink to
Mr. What-shall-call-um. What is his name? Did you tell me? And have I
forgot it already.’

‘Mr. Alan Fairford,’ said Trumbull.

‘Aye, Mr. Alan Fairford--a good name for a fair trader--Mr. Alan
Fairford; and may he be long withheld from the topmost round of
ambition, which I take to be the highest round of a certain ladder.’

While he spoke, he seized the punch-ladle, and began to fill the
glasses. But Mr. Trumbull arrested his hand, until he had, as he
expressed himself, sanctified the liquor by a long grace; during the
pronunciation of which he shut indeed his eyes, but his nostrils became
dilated, as if he were snuffing up the fragrant beverage with peculiar
complacency.

When the grace was at length over, the three friends sat down to their
beverage, and invited Alan Fairford to partake. Anxious about his
situation, and disgusted as he was with his company, he craved, and with
difficulty obtained permission, under the allegation of being fatigued,
heated, and the like, to stretch himself on a couch which was in
the apartment, and attempted at least to procure some rest before
high-water, when the vessel was to sail.

He was at length permitted to use his freedom, and stretched himself on
the couch, having his eyes for some time fixed on the jovial party he
had left, and straining his ears to catch if possible a little of their
conversation. This he soon found was to no purpose for what did actually
reach his ears was disguised so completely by the use of cant words and
the thieves-latin called slang, that even when he caught the words, he
found himself as far as ever from the sense of their conversation. At
length he fell asleep.

It was after Alan had slumbered for three or four hours, that he was
wakened by voices bidding him rise up and prepare to be jogging. He
started up accordingly, and found himself in presence of the same party
of boon companions; who had just dispatched their huge bowl of punch. To
Alan’s surprise, the liquor had made but little innovation on the
brains of men who were accustomed to drink at all hours, and in the most
inordinate quantities. The landlord indeed spoke a little thick, and the
texts of Mr. Thomas Trumbull stumbled on his tongue; but Nanty was one
of those topers, who, becoming early what bon vivants term flustered,
remain whole nights and days at the same point of intoxication; and,
in fact, as they are seldom entirely sober, can be as rarely seen
absolutely drunk. Indeed, Fairford, had he not known how Ewart had been
engaged whilst he himself was asleep, would almost have sworn when he
awoke, that the man was more sober than when he first entered the room.

He was confirmed in this opinion when they descended below, where two or
three sailors and ruffian-looking fellows awaited their commands. Ewart
took the whole direction upon himself, gave his orders with briefness
and precision, and looked to their being executed with the silence and
celerity which that peculiar crisis required. All were now dismissed
for the brig, which lay, as Fairford was given to understand, a little
farther down the river, which is navigable for vessels of light burden
till almost within a mile of the town.

When they issued from the inn, the landlord bid them goodbye. Old
Trumbull walked a little way with them, but the air had probably
considerable effect on the state of his brain; for after reminding
Alan Fairford that the next day was the honourable Sabbath, he became
extremely excursive in an attempt to exhort him to keep it holy. At
length, being perhaps sensible that he was becoming unintelligible, he
thrust a volume into Fairford’s hand--hiccuping at the same time--‘Good
book--good book--fine hymn-book--fit for the honourable Sabbath, whilk
awaits us to-morrow morning.’ Here the iron tongue of time told
five from the town steeple of Annan, to the further confusion of Mr.
Trumbull’s already disordered ideas. ‘Aye? Is Sunday come and gone
already? Heaven be praised! Only it is a marvel the afternoon is sae
dark for the time of the year--Sabbath has slipped ower quietly, but we
have reason to bless oursells it has not been altogether misemployed.
I heard little of the preaching--a cauld moralist, I doubt, served that
out--but, eh--the prayer--I mind it as if I had said the words mysell.’
Here he repeated one or two petitions, which were probably a part of his
family devotions, before he was summoned forth to what he called the
way of business. ‘I never remember a Sabbath pass so cannily off in my
life.’ Then he recollected himself a little, and said to Alan, ‘You
may read that book, Mr. Fairford, to-morrow, all the same, though it be
Monday; for, you see, it was Saturday when we were thegither, and now
it’s Sunday and it’s dark night--so the Sabbath has slipped clean away
through our fingers like water through a sieve, which abideth not; and
we have to begin again to-morrow morning, in the weariful, base, mean,
earthly employments, whilk are unworthy of an immortal spirit--always
excepting the way of business.’

Three of the fellows were now returning to the town, and, at Ewart’s
command, they cut short the patriarch’s exhortation, by leading him back
to his own residence. The rest of the party then proceeded to the brig,
which only waited their arrival to get under weigh and drop down the
river. Nanty Ewart betook himself to steering the brig, and the very
touch of the helm seemed to dispel the remaining influence of the liquor
which he had drunk, since, through a troublesome and intricate channel,
he was able to direct the course of his little vessel with the most
perfect accuracy and safety.

Alan Fairford, for some time, availed himself of the clearness of the
summer morning to gaze on the dimly seen shores betwixt which they
glided, becoming less and less distinct as they receded from each other,
until at length, having adjusted his little bundle by way of pillow, and
wrapped around him the greatcoat with which old Trumbull had equipped
him, he stretched himself on the deck, to try to recover the slumber out
of which he had been awakened. Sleep had scarce begun to settle on
his eyes, ere he found something stirring about his person. With ready
presence of mind he recollected his situation, and resolved to show no
alarm until the purpose of this became obvious; but he was soon relieved
from his anxiety, by finding it was only the result of Nanty’s attention
to his comfort, who was wrapping around him, as softly as he could, a
great boatcloak, in order to defend him from the morning air.

‘Thou art but a cockerel,’ he muttered, ‘but ‘twere pity thou wert
knocked off the perch before seeing a little more of the sweet and sour
of this world--though, faith, if thou hast the usual luck of it, the
best way were to leave thee to the chance of a seasoning fever.’

These words, and the awkward courtesy with which the skipper of the
little brig tucked the sea-coat round Fairford, gave him a confidence of
safety which he had not yet thoroughly possessed. He stretched himself
in more security on the hard planks, and was speedily asleep, though his
slumbers were feverish and unrefreshing.

It has been elsewhere intimated that Alan Fairford inherited from his
mother a delicate constitution, with a tendency to consumption; and,
being an only child, with such a cause for apprehension, care, to the
verge of effeminacy, was taken to preserve him from damp beds, wet
feet, and those various emergencies to which the Caledonian boys of much
higher birth, but more active habits, are generally accustomed. In man,
the spirit sustains the constitutional weakness, as in the winged
tribes the feathers bear aloft the body. But there is a bound to these
supporting qualities; and as the pinions of the bird must at length grow
weary, so the VIS ANIMI of the human struggler becomes broken down by
continued fatigue.

When the voyager was awakened by the light of the sun now riding high
in heaven, he found himself under the influence of an almost intolerable
headache, with heat, thirst, shooting across the back and loins, and
other symptoms intimating violent cold, accompanied with fever. The
manner in which he had passed the preceding day and night, though
perhaps it might have been of little consequence to most young men, was
to him, delicate in constitution and nurture, attended with bad and even
perilous consequences. He felt this was the case, yet would fain have
combated the symptoms of indisposition, which, indeed, he imputed
chiefly to sea-sickness. He sat up on deck, and looked on the scene
around, as the little vessel, having borne down the Solway Firth, was
beginning, with a favourable northerly breeze, to bear away to the
southward, crossing the entrance of the Wampool river, and preparing to
double the most northerly point of Cumberland.

But Fairford felt annoyed with deadly sickness, as well as by pain of
a distressing and oppressive character; and neither Criffel, rising in
majesty on the one hand, nor the distant yet more picturesque outline of
Skiddaw and Glaramara upon the other, could attract his attention in
the manner in which it was usually fixed by beautiful scenery, and
especially that which had in it something new as well as striking. Yet
it was not in Alan Fairford’s nature to give way to despondence, even
when seconded by pain. He had recourse, in the first place, to his
pocket; but instead of the little Sallust he had brought with him, that
the perusal of a classical author might help to pass away a heavy hour,
he pulled out the supposed hymn-book with which he had been presented
a few hours before, by that temperate and scrupulous person, Mr. Thomas
Trumbull, ALIAS Turnpenny. The volume was bound in sable, and its
exterior might have become a psalter. But what was Alan’s astonishment
to read on the title page the following words:--‘Merry Thoughts for
Merry Men; or Mother Midnight’s Miscellany for the Small Hours;’ and
turning over the leaves, he was disgusted with profligate tales, and
more profligate songs, ornamented with figures corresponding in infamy
with the letterpress.

‘Good God!’ he thought, ‘and did this hoary reprobate summon his family
together, and, with such a disgraceful pledge of infamy in his bosom,
venture to approach the throne of his Creator? It must be so; the book
is bound after the manner of those dedicated to devotional subjects,
and doubtless the wretch, in his intoxication, confounded the books
he carried with him, as he did the days of the week.’ Seized with the
disgust with which the young and generous usually regard the vices of
advanced life, Alan, having turned the leaves of the book over in hasty
disdain, flung it from him, as far as he could, into the sea. He then
had recourse to the Sallust, which he had at first sought for in vain.
As he opened the book, Nanty Ewart, who had been looking over his
shoulder, made his own opinion heard.

‘I think now, brother, if you are so much scandalized at a little piece
of sculduddery, which, after all, does nobody any harm, you had better
have given it to me than have flung it into the Solway.’

‘I hope, sir,’ answered Fairford, civilly, ‘you are in the habit of
reading better books.’

‘Faith,’ answered Nanty, ‘with help of a little Geneva text, I could
read my Sallust as well as you can;’ and snatching the book from Alan’s
hand, he began to read, in the Scottish accent:--“‘IGITUR EX DIVITIIS
JUVENTUTEM LUXURIA ATQUE AVARITIA CUM SUPERBILI INVASERE: RAPERE,
CONSUMERE; SUA PARVI PENDERE, ALIENA CUPERE; PUDOREM, AMICITIAM,
PUDICITIAM, DIVINA ATQUE HUMANA PROMISCUA, NIHIL PENSI NEQUE MODERATI
HABERE.” [The translation of the passage is thus given by Sir Henry
Steuart of Allanton:--‘The youth, taught to look up to riches as the
sovereign good, became apt pupils in the school of Luxury. Rapacity and
profusion went hand in hand. Careless of their own fortunes, and eager
to possess those of others, shame and remorse, modesty and moderation,
every principle gave way.’--WORKS OF SALLUST, WITH ORIGINAL ESSAYS, vol.
ii. p.17.]--There is a slap in the face now, for an honest fellow that
has been buccaneering! Never could keep a groat of what he got, or hold
his fingers from what belonged to another, said you? Fie, fie, friend
Crispus, thy morals are as crabbed and austere as thy style--the one has
as little mercy as the other has grace. By my soul, it is unhandsome
to make personal reflections on an old acquaintance, who seeks a little
civil intercourse with you after nigh twenty years’ separation. On my
soul, Master Sallust deserves to float on the Solway better than Mother
Midnight herself.’

‘Perhaps, in some respects, he may merit better usage at our hands,’
said Alan; ‘for if he has described vice plainly, it seems to have been
for the purpose of rendering it generally abhorred.’

‘Well,’ said the seaman, ‘I have heard of the Sortes Virgilianae, and
I dare say the Sortes Sallustianae are as true every tittle. I have
consulted honest Crispus on my own account, and have had a cuff for
my pains. But now see, I open the book on your behalf, and behold
what occurs first to my eye!--Lo you there--“CATILINA ... OMNIUM
FLAGITIOSORUM ATQUE FACINOROSORUM CIRCUM SE HABEBAT.” And then
again--“ETIAM SI QUIS A CULPA VACUUS IN AMICITIAM EJUS INCIDIDERAT
QUOTIDIANO USU PAR SIMILISQUE CAETERIS EFFICIEBATUR.” [After enumerating
the evil qualities of Catiline’s associates, the author adds, ‘If it
happened that any as yet uncontaminated by vice were fatally drawn into
his friendship, the effects of intercourse and snares artfully
spread, subdued every scruple, and early assimilated them to their
conductors.’--Ibidem, p. 19.] That is what I call plain speaking on the
part of the old Roman, Mr. Fairford. By the way, that is a capital name
for a lawyer.

‘Lawyer as I am,’ said Fairford, ‘I do not understand your innuendo.’

‘Nay, then,’ said Ewart, ‘I can try it another way, as well as the
hypocritical old rascal Turnpenny himself could do. I would have you to
know that I am well acquainted with my Bible-book, as well as with my
friend Sallust.’ He then, in a snuffling and canting tone, began to
repeat the Scriptural text--‘“DAVID THEREFORE DEPARTED THENCE, AND WENT
TO THE CAVE OF ADULLAM. AND EVERY ONE THAT WAS IN DISTRESS, AND EVERY
ONE THAT WAS IN DEBT, AND EVERY ONE THAT WAS DISCONTENTED, GATHERED
THEMSELVES TOGETHER UNTO HIM, AND HE BECAME A CAPTAIN OVER THEM.” What
think you of that?’ he said, suddenly changing his manner. ‘Have I
touched you now, sir?’

‘You are as far off as ever,’ replied Fairford.

‘What the devil! and you a repeating frigate between Summertrees and the
laird! Tell that to the marines--the sailors won’t believe it. But you
are right to be cautious, since you can’t say who are right, who not.
But you look ill; it’s but the cold morning air. Will you have a can
of flip, or a jorum of hot rumbo? or will you splice the mainbrace’
(showing a spirit-flask). ‘Will you have a quid--or a pipe--or a
cigar?--a pinch of snuff, at least, to clear your brains and sharpen
your apprehension?’

Fairford rejected all these friendly propositions.

‘Why, then,’ continued Ewart, ‘if you will do nothing for the free
trade, I must patronize it myself.’

So saying, he took a large glass of brandy.

‘A hair of the dog that bit me,’ he continued,--‘of the dog that will
worry me one day soon; and yet, and be d--d to me for an idiot, I must
always have hint at my throat. But, says the old catch’--Here he sang,
and sang well--

  ‘Let’s drink--let’s drink--while life we have;
   We’ll find but cold drinking, cold drinking in the grave.

All this,’ he continued, ‘is no charm against the headache. I wish I
had anything that could do you good. Faith, and we have tea and coffee
aboard! I’ll open a chest or a bag, and let you have some in an instant.
You are at the age to like such catlap better than better stuff.’

Fairford thanked him, and accepted his offer of tea.

Nanty Ewart was soon heard calling about, ‘Break open yon chest--take
out your capful, you bastard of a powder-monkey; we may want it again.
No sugar? all used up for grog, say you? knock another loaf to pieces,
can’t ye? and get the kettle boiling, ye hell’s baby, in no time at
all!’

By dint of these energetic proceedings he was in a short time able to
return to the place where his passenger lay sick and exhausted, with a
cup, or rather a canful, of tea; for everything was on a large scale
on board of the JUMPING JENNY. Alan drank it eagerly, and with so much
appearance of being refreshed that Nanty Ewart swore he would have
some too, and only laced it, as his phrase went, with a single glass of
brandy. [See Note 8.]





NARRATIVE OF ALAN FAIRFORD, CONTINUED

We left Alan Fairford on the deck of the little smuggling brig, in that
disconsolate situation, when sickness and nausea, attack a heated and
fevered frame, and an anxious mind. His share of sea-sickness, however,
was not so great as to engross his sensations entirely, or altogether
to divert his attention from what was passing around. If he could not
delight in the swiftness and agility with which the ‘little frigate’
walked the waves, or amuse himself by noticing the beauty of the
sea-views around him, where the distant Skiddaw raised his brow, as if
in defiance of the clouded eminence of Criffel, which lorded it over the
Scottish side of the estuary, he had spirits and composure enough to pay
particular attention to the master of the vessel, on whose character his
own safety in all probability was dependent.

Nanty Ewart had now given the helm to one of his people, a bald-pated,
grizzled old fellow, whose whole life had been spent in evading
the revenue laws, with now and then the relaxation of a few months’
imprisonment, for deforcing officers, resisting seizures, and the like
offences.

Nanty himself sat down by Fairford, helped him to his tea, with such
other refreshments as he could think of, and seemed in his way sincerely
desirous to make his situation as comfortable as things admitted.
Fairford had thus an opportunity to study his countenance and manners
more closely.

It was plain, Ewart, though a good seaman, had not been bred upon that
element. He was a reasonably good scholar, and seemed fond of showing it
by recurring to the subject of Sallust and Juvenal; while, on the other
hand, sea-phrases seldom chequered his conversation. He had been in
person what is called a smart little man; but the tropical sun had burnt
his originally fair complexion to a dusty red; and the bile which was
diffused through his system, had stained it with a yellowish black--what
ought to have been the white part of his eyes, in particular, had a hue
as deep as the topaz. He was very thin, or rather emaciated, and his
countenance, though still indicating alertness and activity, showed a
constitution exhausted with excessive use of his favourite stimulus.

‘I see you look at me hard,’ said he to Fairford. ‘Had you been an
officer of the d--d customs, my terriers’ backs would have been up. He
opened his breast, and showed Alan a pair of pistols disposed between
his waistcoat and jacket, placing his finger at the same time upon the
cock of one of them. ‘But come, you are an honest fellow, though you’re
a close one. I dare say you think me a queer customer; but I can tell
you, they that see the ship leave harbour know little of the seas she
is to sail through. My father, honest old gentleman, never would have
thought to see me master of the JUMPING JENNY.’

Fairford said, it seemed very clear indeed that Mr. Ewart’s education
was far superior to the line he at present occupied.

‘Oh, Criffel to Solway Moss!’ said the other. Why, man, I should have
been an expounder of the word, with a wig like a snow-wreath, and a
stipend like--like--like a hundred pounds a year, I suppose. I can spend
thrice as much as that, though, being such as I am. Here he sang a scrap
of an old Northumbrian ditty, mimicking the burr of the natives of that
county:--

  ‘Willy Foster’s gone to sea,
   Siller buckles at his knee,
   He’ll come back and marry me--
              Canny Willy Foster.’

‘I have no doubt,’ said Fairford, ‘your present occupation is more
lucrative; ‘but I should have thought the Church might have been more’--

He stopped, recollecting that it was not his business to say anything
disagreeable.

‘More respectable, you mean, I suppose?’ said Ewart, with a sneer, and
squirting the tobacco-juice through his front teeth; then was silent for
a moment, and proceeded in a tone of candour which some internal touch
of conscience dictated. ‘And so it would, Mr. Fairford--and happier,
too, by a thousand degrees--though I have had my pleasures too. But
there was my father (God bless the old man!) a true chip of the old
Presbyterian block, walked his parish like a captain on the quarterdeck,
and was always ready to do good to rich and poor--Off went the laird’s
hat to the minister, as fast as the poor man’s bonnet. When the eye saw
him--Pshaw! what have I to do with that now?--Yes, he was, as Virgil
hath it, “VIR SAPIENTIA ET PIETATE GRAVIS.” But he might have been the
wiser man, had he kept me at home, when he sent me at nineteen to study
Divinity at the head of the highest stair in the Covenant Close. It
was a cursed mistake in the old gentleman. What though Mrs. Cantrips of
Kittlebasket (for she wrote herself no less) was our cousin five
times removed, and took me on that account to board and lodging at six
shillings instead of seven shillings a week? it was a d--d bad saving,
as the case proved. Yet her very dignity might have kept me in order;
for she never read a chapter excepting out of a Cambridge Bible, printed
by Daniel, and bound in embroidered velvet. I think I see it at this
moment! And on Sundays, when we had a quart of twopenny ale, instead
of butter-milk, to our porridge, it was always served up in a silver
posset-dish. Also she used silver-mounted spectacles, whereas even my
father’s were cased in mere horn. These things had their impression at
first, but we get used to grandeur by degrees. Well, sir!--Gad, I can
scarce get on with my story--it sticks in my throat--must take a trifle
to wash it down. Well, this dame had a daughter--Jess Cantrips, a
black-eyed, bouncing wench--and, as the devil would have it, there was
the d--d five-story stair--her foot was never from it, whether I went
out or came home from the Divinity Hall. I would have eschewed her,
sir--I would, on my soul; for I was as innocent a lad as ever came from
Lammermuir; but there was no possibility of escape, retreat, or flight,
unless I could have got a pair of wings, or made use of a ladder seven
stories high, to scale the window of my attic. It signifies little
talking--you may suppose how all this was to end--I would have married
the girl, and taken my chance--I would, by Heaven! for she was a pretty
girl, and a good girl, till she and I met; but you know the old song,
“Kirk would not let us be.” A gentleman, in my case, would have settled
the matter with the kirk-treasurer for a small sum of money; but the
poor stibbler, the penniless dominie, having married his cousin of
Kittlebasket, must next have proclaimed her frailty to the whole parish,
by mounting the throne of Presbyterian penance, and proving, as Othello
says, “his love a whore,” in face of the whole congregation.

‘In this extremity I dared not stay where I was, and so thought to go
home to my father. But first I got Jack Radaway, a lad from the same
parish, and who lived in the same infernal stair, to make some inquiries
how the old gentleman had taken the matter. I soon, by way of answer,
learned, to the great increase of my comfortable reflections, that the
good old man made as much clamour as if such a thing as a man’s eating
his wedding dinner without saying grace had never happened since Adam’s
time. He did nothing for six days but cry out, “Ichabod, Ichabod, the
glory is departed from my house!” and on the seventh he preached a
sermon, in which he enlarged on this incident as illustrative of one of
the great occasions for humiliation, and causes of national defection. I
hope the course he took comforted himself--I am sure it made me ashamed
to show my nose at home. So I went down to Leith, and, exchanging my
hoddin grey coat of my mother’s spinning for such a jacket as this, I
entered my name at the rendezvous as an able-bodied landsman, and
sailed with the tender round to Plymouth, where they were fitting out
a squadron for the West Indies. There I was put aboard the FEARNOUGHT,
Captain Daredevil--among whose crew I soon learned to fear Satan (the
terror of my early youth) as little as the toughest Jack on board. I had
some qualms at first, but I took the remedy’ (tapping the case-bottle)
‘which I recommend to you, being as good for sickness of the soul as for
sickness of the stomach--What, you won’t?--very well, I must, then--here
is to ye.’

‘You would, I am afraid, find your education of little use in your new
condition?’ said Fairford.

‘Pardon me, sir,’ resumed the captain of the JUMPING JENNY; ‘my handful
of Latin, and small pinch of Greek, were as useless as old junk, to be
sure; but my reading, writing and accompting, stood me in good stead,
and brought me forward; I might have been schoolmaster--aye, and master,
in time; but that valiant liquor, rum, made a conquest of me rather too
often, and so, make what sail I could, I always went to leeward. We were
four years broiling in that blasted climate, and I came back at last
with a little prize-money. I always had thoughts of putting things to
rights in the Covenant Close, and reconciling myself to my father. I
found out Jack Hadaway, who was TUPTOWING away with a dozen of wretched
boys, and a fine string of stories he had ready to regale my ears
withal. My father had lectured on what he called “my falling away,” for
seven Sabbaths, when, just as his parishioners began to hope that the
course was at an end, he was found dead in his bed on the eighth Sunday
morning. Jack Hadaway assured me, that if I wished to atone for my
errors, by undergoing the fate of the first martyr, I had only to go
to my native village, where the very stones of the street would rise
up against me as my father’s murderer. Here was a pretty item--well, my
tongue clove to my mouth for an hour, and was only able at last to
utter the name of Mrs. Cantrips. Oh, this was a new theme for my Job’s
comforter. My sudden departure--my father’s no less sudden death--had
prevented the payment of the arrears of my board and lodging--the
landlord was a haberdasher, with a heart as rotten as the muslin
wares he dealt in. Without respect to her age or gentle kin, my Lady
Kittlebasket was ejected from her airy habitation--her porridge-pot,
silver posset-dish, silver-mounted spectacles, and Daniel’s Cambridge
Bible, sold, at the Cross of Edinburgh, to the caddie who would bid
highest for them, and she herself driven to the workhouse, where she got
in with difficulty, but was easily enough lifted out, at the end of the
month, as dead as her friends could desire. Merry tidings this to me,
who had been the d----d’ (he paused a moment) ‘ORIGO MALI--Gad, I think
my confession would sound better in Latin than in English!

‘But the best jest was behind--I had just power to stammer out something
about Jess--by my faith he HAD an answer! I had taught Jess one trade,
and, like a prudent girl, she had found out another for herself;
unluckily, they were both contraband, and Jess Cantrips, daughter of the
Lady Kittlebasket, had the honour to be transported to the plantations,
for street-walking and pocket-picking, about six months before I touched
shore.’

He changed the bitter tone of affected pleasantry into an attempt to
laugh, then drew his swarthy hand across his swarthy eyes, and said in a
more natural accent, ‘Poor Jess!’

There was a pause--until Fairford, pitying the poor man’s state of mind,
and believing he saw something in him that, but for early error and
subsequent profligacy, might have been excellent and noble, helped on
the conversation by asking, in a tone of commiseration, how he had been
able to endure such a load of calamity.

‘Why, very well,’ answered the seaman; ‘exceedingly well--like a tight
ship in a brisk gale. Let me recollect. I remember thanking Jack, very
composedly, for the interesting and agreeable communication; I then
pulled out my canvas pouch, with my hoard of moidores, and taking out
two pieces, I bid Jack keep the rest till I came back, as I was for a
cruise about Auld Reekie. The poor devil looked anxiously, but I shook
him by the hand, and ran downstairs, in such confusion of mind, that
notwithstanding what I had heard, I expected to meet Jess at every
turning.

It was market-day, and the usual number of rogues and fools were
assembled at the Cross. I observed everybody looked strange on me, and I
thought some laughed. I fancy I had been making queer faces enough, and
perhaps talking to myself, When I saw myself used in this manner, I held
out my clenched fists straight before me, stooped my head, and, like a
ram when he makes his race, darted off right down the street, scattering
groups of weatherbeaten lairds and periwigged burgesses, and bearing
down all before me. I heard the cry of “Seize the madman!” echoed, in
Celtic sounds, from the City Guard, with “Ceaze ta matman!”--but pursuit
and opposition were in vain. I pursued my career; the smell of the sea,
I suppose, led me to Leith, where, soon after, I found myself walking
very quietly on the shore, admiring the tough round and sound cordage
of the vessels, and thinking how a loop, with a man at the end of one of
them, would look, by way of tassel.

‘I was opposite to the rendezvous, formerly my place of refuge--in
I bolted--found one or two old acquaintances, made half a dozen
new ones--drank for two days--was put aboard the tender--off to
Portsmouth--then landed at the Haslar hospital in a fine hissing-hot
fever. Never mind--I got better--nothing can kill me--the West Indies
were my lot again, for since I did not go where I deserved in the
next world, I had something as like such quarters as can be had in
this--black devils for inhabitants--flames and earthquakes, and so
forth, for your element. Well, brother, something or other I did or
said--I can’t tell what--How the devil should I, when I was as drunk
as David’s sow, you know? But I was punished, my lad--made to kiss the
wench that never speaks but when she scolds, and that’s the gunner’s
daughter, comrade. Yes, the minister’s son of no matter where--has the
cat’s scratch on his back! This roused me, and when we were ashore with
the boat, I gave three inches of the dirk, after a stout tussle, to the
fellow I blamed most, and took the bush for it. There were plenty of
wild lads then along shore--and, I don’t care who knows--I went on the
account, look you--sailed under the black flag and marrow-bones--was a
good friend to the sea, and an enemy to all that sailed on it.’

Fairford, though uneasy in his mind at finding himself, a lawyer, so
close to a character so lawless, thought it best, nevertheless, to put a
good face on the matter, and asked Mr. Ewart, with as much unconcern as
he could assume, ‘whether he was fortunate as a rover?’

‘No, no--d--n it, no,’ replied Nanty; ‘the devil a crumb of butter was
ever churned that would stick upon my bread. There was no order among
us--he that was captain to-day, was swabber to-morrow; and as for
plunder--they say old Avery, and one or two close hunks, made money; but
in my time, all went as it came; and reason good, for if a fellow had
saved five dollars, his throat would have been cut in his hammock. And
then it was a cruel, bloody work.--Pah,--we’ll say no more about it.
I broke with them at last, for what they did on board of a bit of a
snow--no matter what it was bad enough, since it frightened me--I took
French leave, and came in upon the proclamation, so I am free of all
that business. And here I sit, the skipper of the JUMPING JENNY--a
nutshell of a thing, but goes through the water like a dolphin. If it
were not for yon hypocritical scoundrel at Annan, who has the best end
of the profit, and takes none of the risk, I should be well enough--as
well as I want to be. Here is no lack of my best friend,’--touching his
case-bottle;--‘but, to tell you a secret, he and I have got so used to
each other, I begin to think he is like a professed joker, that makes
your sides sore with laughing if you see him but now and then; but if
you take up house with him, he can only make your head stupid. But I
warrant the old fellow is doing the best he can for me, after all.’

‘And what may that be?’ said Fairford.

‘He is KILLING me,’ replied Nanty Ewart; ‘and I am only sorry he is so
long about it.’

So saying he jumped on his feet, and, tripping up and down the deck,
gave his orders with his usual clearness and decision, notwithstanding
the considerable quantity of spirits which he had contrived to swallow
while recounting his history.

Although far from feeling well, Fairford endeavoured to rouse himself
and walk to the head of the brig, to enjoy the beautiful prospect, as
well as to take some note of the course which the vessel held. To his
great surprise, instead of standing across to the opposite shore
from which she had departed, the brig was going down the Firth, and
apparently steering into the Irish Sea. He called to Nanty Ewart, and
expressed his surprise at the course they were pursuing, and asked
why they did not stand straight across the Firth for some port in
Cumberland.

‘Why, this is what I call a reasonable question, now,’ answered Nanty;
‘as if a ship could go as straight to its port as a horse to the stable,
or a free-trader could sail the Solway as securely as a King’s cutter!
Why, I’ll tell ye, brother--if I do not see a smoke on Bowness, that
is the village upon the headland yonder, I must stand out to sea for
twenty-four hours at least, for we must keep the weather-gage if there
are hawks abroad.’

‘And if you do see the signal of safety, Master Ewart, what is to be
done then?’

‘Why then, and in that case, I must keep off till night, and then run
you, with the kegs and the rest of the lumber, ashore at Skinburness,’

‘And then I am to meet with this same laird whom I have the letter for?’
continued Fairford.

‘That,’ said Ewart, ‘is thereafter as it may be; the ship has its
course--the fair trader has his port--but it is not easy to say where
the laird may be found. But he will be within twenty miles of us, off or
on--and it will be my business to guide you to him.’

Fairford could not withstand the passing impulse of terror which crossed
him, when thus reminded that he was so absolutely in the power of a man,
who, by his own account, had been a pirate, and who was at present, in
all probability, an outlaw as well as a contraband trader. Nanty Ewart
guessed the cause of his involuntary shuddering.

‘What the devil should I gain,’ he said, ‘by passing so poor a card as
you are? Have I not had ace of trumps in my hand, and did I not play it
fairly? Aye, I say the JUMPING JENNY can run in other ware as well as
kegs. Put SIGMA and TAU to Ewart, and see how that will spell--D’ye take
me now?’

‘No indeed,’ said Fairford; ‘I am utterly ignorant of what you allude
to.’

‘Now, by Jove!’ said Nanty Ewart, ‘thou art either the deepest or the
shallowest fellow I ever met with--or you are not right after all. I
wonder where Summertrees could pick up such a tender along-shore. Will
you let me see his letter?’

Fairford did not hesitate to gratify his wish, which, he was aware, he
could not easily resist. The master of the JUMPING JENNY looked at
the direction very attentively, then turned the letter to and fro, and
examined each flourish of the pen, as if he were judging of a piece
of ornamented manuscript; then handled it back to Fairford, without a
single word of remark.

‘Am I right now?’ said the young lawyer.

‘Why, for that matter,’ answered Nanty, ‘the letter is right, sure
enough; but whether you are right or not, is your own business rather
than mine.’ And, striking upon a flint with the back of a knife, he
kindled a cigar as thick as his finger, and began to smoke away with
great perseverance.

Alan Fairford continued to regard him with a melancholy feeling, divided
betwixt the interest he took in the unhappy man, and a not unnatural
apprehension for the issue of his own adventure.

Ewart, notwithstanding the stupefying nature of his pastime, seemed
to guess what was working in his passenger’s mind; for, after they had
remained some time engaged in silently observing each other, he suddenly
dashed his cigar on the deck, and said to him, ‘Well then, if you are
sorry for me, I am sorry for you. D--n me, if I have cared a button for
man or mother’s son, since two years since when I had another peep of
Jack Hadaway. ‘The fellow was got as fat as a Norway whale--married to a
great Dutch-built quean that had brought him six children. I believe
he did not know me, and thought I was come to rob his house; however, I
made up a poor face, and told him who I was. Poor Jack would have given
me shelter and clothes, and began to tell me of the moidores that were
in bank, when I wanted them. Egad, he changed his note when I told him
what my life had been, and only wanted to pay me my cash and get rid
of me. I never saw so terrified a visage. I burst out a-laughing in his
face, told him it was all a humbug, and that the moidores were all his
own, henceforth and for ever, and so ran off. I caused one of our people
send him a bag of tea and a keg of brandy, before I left--poor Jack!
I think you are the second person these ten years, that has cared a
tobacco-stopper for Nanty Ewart.’

‘Perhaps, Mr. Ewart,’ said Fairford, ‘you live chiefly with men too
deeply interested for their own immediate safety, to think much upon the
distress of others?’

‘And with whom do you yourself consort, I pray?’ replied Nanty, smartly.
‘Why, with plotters, that can make no plot to better purpose than their
own hanging; and incendiaries, that are snapping the flint upon wet
tinder. You’ll as soon raise the dead as raise the Highlands--you’ll as
soon get a grunt from a dead sow as any comfort from Wales or Cheshire.
You think because the pot is boiling, that no scum but yours can come
uppermost--I know better, by--. All these rackets and riots that you
think are trending your way have no relation at all to your interest;
and the best way to make the whole kingdom friends again at once, would
be the alarm of such an undertaking as these mad old fellows are trying
to launch into.

‘I really am not in such secrets as you seem to allude to,’ said
Fairford; and, determined at the same time to avail himself as far as
possible of Nanty’s communicative disposition, he added, with a smile,’
And if I were, I should not hold it prudent to make them much the
subject of conversation. But I am sure, so sensible a man as Summertrees
and the laird may correspond together without offence to the state.’

‘I take you, friend--I take you,’ said Nanty Ewart, upon whom, at
length, the liquor and tobacco-smoke began to make considerable
innovation. ‘As to what gentlemen may or may not correspond about, why
we may pretermit the question, as the old professor used to say at the
Hall; and as to Summertrees, I will say nothing, knowing him to be an
old fox. But I say that this fellow the laird is a firebrand in the
country; that he is stirring up all the honest fellows who should be
drinking their brandy quietly, by telling them stories about their
ancestors and the Forty-five; and that he is trying to turn all waters
into his own mill-dam, and to set his sails to all winds. And because
the London people are roaring about for some pinches of their own,
he thinks to win them to his turn with a wet finger. And he gets
encouragement from some, because they want a spell of money from him;
and from others, because they fought for the cause once and are ashamed
to go back; and others, because they have nothing to lose; and others,
because they are discontented fools. But if he has brought you, or any
one, I say not whom, into this scrape, with the hope of doing any good,
he’s a d--d decoy-duck, and that’s all I can say for him; and you are
geese, which is worse than being decoy-ducks, or lame-ducks either.
And so here is to the prosperity of King George the Third, and the true
Presbyterian religion, and confusion to the Pope, the Devil, and the
Pretender! I’ll tell you what, Mr. Fairbairn, I am but tenth owner of
this bit of a craft, the JUMPING JENNY--but tenth owner and must sail
her by my owners’ directions. But if I were whole owner, I would not
have the brig be made a ferry-boat for your Jacobitical, old-fashioned
Popish riff-raff, Mr. Fairport--I would not, by my soul; they should
walk the plank, by the gods, as I have seen better men do when I sailed
under the What-d’ye-callum colours. But being contraband goods, and on
board my vessel, and I with my sailing orders in my hand, why, I am to
forward them as directed--I say, John Roberts, keep her up a bit with
the helm.--and so, Mr. Fairweather, what I do is--as the d--d villain
Turnpenny says--all in the way of business.’

He had been speaking with difficulty for the last five minutes, and
now at length dropped on the deck, fairly silenced by the quantity of
spirits which he had swallowed, but without having showed any glimpse of
the gaiety, or even of the extravagance, of intoxication.

The old sailor stepped forward and flung a sea-cloak over the
slumberer’s shoulders, and added, looking at Fairford, ‘Pity of him he
should have this fault; for without it, he would have been as clever a
fellow as ever trod a plank with ox leather.’

‘And what are we to do now?’ said Fairford.

‘Stand off and on, to be sure, till we see the signal, and then obey
orders.’

So saying, the old man turned to his duty, and left the passenger to
amuse himself with his own meditations. Presently afterward a light
column of smoke was seen rising from the little headland.

‘I can tell you what we are to do now, master,’ said the sailor. ‘We’ll
stand out to sea, and then run in again with the evening tide, and
make Skinburness; or, if there’s not light, we can run into the
Wampool river, and put you ashore about Kirkbride or Leaths, with the
long-boat.’

Fairford, unwell before, felt this destination condemned him to an agony
of many hours, which his disordered stomach and aching head were ill
able to endure. There was no remedy, however, but patience, and the
recollection that he was suffering in the cause of friendship. As the
sun rose high, he became worse; his sense of smell appeared to acquire
a morbid degree of acuteness, for the mere purpose of inhaling and
distinguishing all the various odours with which he was surrounded, from
that of pitch to all the complicated smells of the hold. His heart, too,
throbbed under the heat, and he felt as if in full progress towards a
high fever.

The seamen, who were civil and attentive considering their calling,
observed his distress, and one contrived to make an awning out of an
old sail, while another compounded some lemonade, the only liquor which
their passenger could be prevailed upon to touch. After drinking it off,
he obtained, but could not be said to enjoy, a few hours of troubled
slumber.





NARRATIVE OF ALAN FAIRFORD, CONTINUED

Alan Fairford’s spirit was more ready to encounter labour than his frame
was adequate to support it. In spite of his exertions, when he awoke,
after five or six hours’ slumber, he found that he was so much disabled
by dizziness in his head and pains in his limbs, that he could not raise
himself without assistance. He heard with some pleasure that they were
now running right for the Wampool river, and that he would be put on
shore in a very short time. The vessel accordingly lay to, and presently
showed a weft in her ensign, which was hastily answered by signals from
on shore. Men and horses were seen to come down the broken path which
leads to the shore; the latter all properly tackled for carrying their
loading. Twenty fishing barks were pushed afloat at once, and crowded
round the brig with much clamour, laughter, cursing, and jesting. Amidst
all this apparent confusion there was the essential regularity. Nanty
Ewart again walked his quarter-deck as if he had never tasted spirits
in his life, issued the necessary orders with precision, and saw them
executed with punctuality. In half an hour the loading of the brig was
in a great measure disposed in the boats; in a quarter of an hour more,
it was landed on the beach, and another interval of about the same
duration was sufficient to distribute it on the various strings of
packhorses which waited for that purpose, and which instantly dispersed,
each on its own proper adventure. More mystery was observed in loading
the ship’s boat with a quantity of small barrels, which seemed to
contain ammunition. This was not done until the commercial customers
had been dismissed; and it was not until this was performed that Ewart
proposed to Alan, as he lay stunned with pain and noise, to accompany
him ashore.

It was with difficulty that Fairford could get over the side of the
vessel, and he could not seat himself on the stern of the boat without
assistance from the captain and his people. Nanty Ewart, who saw nothing
in this worse than an ordinary fit of sea-sickness, applied the usual
topics of consolation. He assured his passenger that he would be quite
well by and by, when he had been half an hour on terra firma, and
that he hoped to drink a can and smoke a pipe with him at Father
Crackenthorp’s, for all that he felt a little out of the way for riding
the wooden horse.

‘Who is Father Crackenthorp?’ said Fairford, though scarcely able to
articulate the question.

‘As honest a fellow as is of a thousand,’ answered Nanty.

‘Ah, how much good brandy he and I have made little of in our day! By my
soul, Mr. Fairbird, he is the prince of skinkers, and the father of
the free trade--not a stingy hypocritical devil like old Turnpenny
Skinflint, that drinks drunk on other folk’s cost, and thinks it sin
when he has to pay for it--but a real hearty old cock;--the sharks have
been at and about him this many a day, but Father Crackenthorp knows how
to trim his sails--never a warrant but he hears of it before the ink’s
dry. He is BONUS SOCIUS with headborough and constable. The king’s
exchequer could not bribe a man to inform against him. If any such
rascal were to cast up, why, he would miss his ears next morning, or
be sent to seek them in the Solway. He is a statesman, [A small landed
proprietor.] though he keeps a public; but, indeed, that is only for
convenience and to excuse his having cellarage and folk about him; his
wife’s a canny woman--and his daughter Doll too. Gad, you’ll be in port
there till you get round again; and I’ll keep my word with you, and
bring you to speech of the laird.

Gad, the only trouble I shall have is to get you out of the house;
for Doll is a rare wench, and my dame a funny old one, and Father
Crackenthorp the rarest companion! He’ll drink you a bottle of rum or
brandy without starting, but never wet his lips with the nasty Scottish
stuff that the canting old scoundrel Turnpenny has brought into fashion.
He is a gentleman, every inch of him, old Crackenthorp; in his own way,
that is; and besides, he has a share in the JUMPING JENNY, and many a
moonlight outfit besides. He can give Doll a pretty penny, if he likes
the tight fellow that would turn in with her for life.’

In the midst of this prolonged panegyric on Father Crackenthorp, the
boat touched the beach, the rowers backed their oars to keep her afloat,
whilst the other fellows lumped into the surf, and, with the most rapid
dexterity, began to hand the barrels ashore.

‘Up with them higher on the beach, my hearties,’ exclaimed Nanty
Ewart--‘High and dry--high and dry--this gear will not stand wetting.
Now, out with our spare hand here--high and dry with him too.
What’s that?--the galloping of horse! Oh, I hear the jingle of the
packsaddles--they are our own folk.’

By this time all the boat’s load was ashore, consisting of the little
barrels; and the boat’s crew, standing to their arms, ranged themselves
in front, waiting the advance of the horses which came clattering along
the beach. A man, overgrown with corpulence, who might be distinguished
in the moonlight panting with his own exertions, appeared at the head
of the cavalcade, which consisted of horses linked together, and
accommodated with packsaddles, and chains for securing the kegs which
made a dreadful clattering.

‘How now, Father Crackenthorp?’ said Ewart--‘Why this hurry with your
horses? We mean to stay a night with you, and taste your old brandy, and
my dame’s homebrewed. The signal is up, man, and all is right.’

‘All is wrong, Captain Nanty,’ cried the man to whom he spoke; ‘and you
are the lad that is like to find it so, unless you bundle off--there are
new brooms bought at Carlisle yesterday to sweep the country of you and
the like of you--so you were better be jogging inland.

‘How many rogues are the officers? If not more than ten, I will make
fight.’

‘The devil you will!’ answered Crackenthorp. ‘You were better not, for
they have the bloody-backed dragoons from Carlisle with them.’

‘Nay, then,’ said Nanty, ‘we must make sail. Come, Master Fairlord,
you must mount and ride. He does not hear me--he has fainted, I
believe--What the devil shall I do? Father Crackenthorp, I must leave
this young fellow with you till the gale blows out--hark ye--goes
between the laird and the t’other old one; he can neither ride nor
walk--I must send him up to you.’

‘Send him up to the gallows!’ said Crackenthorp; ‘there is Quartermaster
Thwacker, with twenty men, up yonder; an he had not some kindness for
Doll, I had never got hither for a start--but you must get off, or they
will be here to seek us, for his orders are woundy particular; and these
kegs contain worse than whisky--a hanging matter, I take it.’

‘I wish they were at the bottom of Wampool river, with them they belong
to,’ said Nanty Ewart. ‘But they are part of cargo; and what to do with
the poor young fellow--’

‘Why, many a better fellow has roughed it on the grass with a cloak o’er
him,’ said Crackenthorp. ‘If he hath a fever, nothing is so cooling as
the night air.’

‘Yes, he would be cold enough in the morning, no doubt; but it’s a kind
heart and shall not cool so soon if I can help it,’ answered the captain
of the JUMPING JENNY.

‘Well, captain, an ye will risk your own neck for another man’s, why not
take him to the old girls at Fairladies?’

‘What, the Miss Arthurets! The Papist jades! But never mind; it will
do--I have known them take in a whole sloop’s crew that were stranded on
the sands.’

‘You may run some risk, though, by turning up to Fairladies; for I tell
you they are all up through the country.’

‘Never mind--I may chance to put some of them down again,’ said Nanty,
cheerfully. ‘Come, lads, bustle to your tackle. Are you all loaded?’

‘Aye, aye, captain; we will be ready in a jiffy,’ answered the gang.

‘D--n your captains! Have you a mind to have me hanged if I am taken?
All’s hail-fellow, here.’

‘A sup at parting,’ said Father Crackenthorp, extending a flask to Nanty
Ewart.

‘Not the twentieth part of a drop,’ said Nanty. ‘No Dutch courage for
me--my heart is always high enough when there’s a chance of fighting;
besides, if I live drunk, I should like to die sober. Here, old
Jephson--you are the best-natured brute amongst them--get the lad
between us on a quiet horse, and we will keep him upright, I warrant.’

As they raised Fairford from the ground, he groaned heavily, and asked
faintly where they were taking him to.

‘To a place where you will be as snug and quiet as a mouse in his hole,’
said Nanty, ‘if so be that we can get you there safely. Good-bye, Father
Crackenthorp--poison the quartermaster, if you can.’

The loaded horses then sprang forward at a hard trot, following each
other in a line, and every second horse being mounted by a stout fellow
in a smock frock, which served to conceal the arms with which most of
these desperate men were provided. Ewart followed in the rear of the
line, and, with the occasional assistance of old Jephson, kept his young
charge erect in the saddle. He groaned heavily from time to time; and
Ewart, more moved with compassion for his situation than might have been
expected from his own habits, endeavoured to amuse him and comfort him,
by some account of the place to which they were conveying him--his words
of consolation being, however, frequently interrupted by the necessity
of calling to his people, and many of them being lost amongst the
rattling of the barrels, and clinking of the tackle and small chains by
which they are secured on such occasions.

‘And you see, brother, you will be in safe quarters at Fairladies--good
old scrambling house--good old maids enough, if they were not
Papists,--Hollo, you Jack Lowther; keep the line, can’t ye, and shut
your rattle-trap, you broth of a--? And so, being of a good family, and
having enough, the old lasses have turned a kind of saints, and nuns,
and so forth. The place they live in was some sort of nun-shop long ago,
as they have them still in Flanders; so folk call them the Vestals of
Fairladies--that may be, or may not be; and I care not whether it be or
no.--Blinkinsop, hold your tongue, and be d--d!--And so, betwixt great
alms and good dinners, they are well thought of by rich and poor, and
their trucking with Papists is looked over. There are plenty of priests,
and stout young scholars, and such-like, about the house it’s a hive of
them. More shame that government send dragoons out after-a few honest
fellows that bring the old women of England a drop of brandy, and let
these ragamuffins smuggle in as much papistry and--Hark!--was that
a whistle? No, it’s only a plover. You, Jem Collier, keep a look-out
ahead--we’ll meet them at the High Whins, or Brotthole bottom, or
nowhere. Go a furlong ahead, I say, and look sharp.--These Misses
Arthurets feed the hungry, and clothe the naked, and such-like
acts--which my poor father used to say were filthy rags, but he dressed
himself out with as many of them as most folk.--D--n that stumbling
horse! Father Crackenthorp should be d--d himself for putting an honest
fellow’s neck in such jeopardy.’

Thus, and with much more to the same purpose, Nanty ran on, increasing,
by his well-intended annoyance, the agony of Alan Fairford, who,
tormented by a racking pain along the back and loins, which made the
rough trot of the horse torture to him, had his aching head still
further rended and split by the hoarse voice of the sailor, close to
his ear. Perfectly passive, however, he did not even essay to give
any answer; and indeed his own bodily distress was now so great and
engrossing, that to think of his situation was impossible, even if he
could have mended it by doing so.

Their course was inland; but in what direction, Alan had no means of
ascertaining. They passed at first over heaths and sandy downs; they
crossed more than one brook, or beck, as they are called in that
country--some of them of considerable depth--and at length reached
a cultivated country, divided, according to the English fashion of
agriculture, into very small fields or closes, by high banks, overgrown
with underwood, and surmounted by hedge-row trees, amongst which winded
a number of impracticable and complicated lanes, where the boughs
projecting from the embankments on each side, intercepted the light of
the moon, and endangered the safety of the horsemen. But through this
labyrinth the experience of the guides conducted them without a blunder,
and without even the slackening of their pace. In many places, however,
it was impossible for three men to ride abreast; and therefore the
burden of supporting Alan Fairford fell alternately to old Jephson
and to Nanty; and it was with much difficulty that they could keep him
upright in his saddle.

At length, when his powers of sufferance were quite worn out, and he was
about to implore them to leave him to his fate in the first cottage or
shed--or under a haystack or a hedge--or anywhere, so he was left at
ease, Collier, who rode ahead, passed back the word that they were at
the avenue to Fairladies--‘Was he to turn up?’

Committing the charge of Fairford to Jephson, Nanty dashed up to the
head of the troop, and gave his orders.--‘Who knows the house best?’

‘Sam Skelton’s a Catholic,’ said Lowther.

‘A d--d bad religion,’ said Nanty, of whose Presbyterian education a
hatred of Popery seemed to be the only remnant. ‘But I am glad there is
one amongst us, anyhow. You, Sam, being a Papist, know Fairladies and
the old maidens I dare say; so do you fall out of the line, and wait
here with me; and do you, Collier, carry on to Walinford bottom, then
turn down the beck till you come to the old mill, and Goodman Grist the
Miller, or old Peel-the-Causeway, will tell you where to stow; but I
will be up with you before that.’

The string of loaded horses then struck forward at their former pace,
while Nanty, with Sam Skelton, waited by the roadside till the rear came
up, when Jephson and Fairford joined them, and, to the great relief
of the latter, they began to proceed at an easier pace than formerly,
suffering the gang to precede them, till the clatter and clang attending
their progress began to die away in the distance. They had not proceeded
a pistol-shot from the place where they parted, when a short turning
brought them in front of an old mouldering gateway, whose heavy
pinnacles were decorated in the style of the seventeenth century, with
clumsy architectural ornaments; several of which had fallen down from
decay, and lay scattered about, no further care having been taken than
just to remove them out of the direct approach to the avenue. The great
stone pillars, glimmering white in the moonlight, had some fanciful
resemblance to supernatural apparitions, and the air of neglect all
around, gave an uncomfortable idea of the habitation to those who passed
its avenue.

‘There used to be no gate here,’ said Skelton, finding their way
unexpectedly stopped.

‘But there is a gate now, and a porter too,’ said a rough voice from
within. ‘Who be you, and what do you want at this time of night?’

‘We want to come to speech of the ladies--of the Misses Arthuret,’ said
Nanty; ‘and to ask lodging for a sick man.’

‘There is no speech to be had of the Miss Arthurets at this time of
night, and you may carry your sick man to the doctor,’ answered the
fellow from within, gruffly; ‘for as sure as there is savour in salt,
and scent in rosemary, you will get no entrance--put your pipes up and
be jogging on.’

‘Why, Dick Gardener,’ said Skelton, ‘be thou then turned porter?’

‘What, do you know who I am?’ said the domestic sharply.

‘I know you, by your by-word,’ answered the other; ‘What, have you
forgot little Sam Skelton, and the brock in the barrel?’

‘No, I have not forgotten you,’ answered the acquaintance of Sam
Skelton; ‘but my orders are peremptory to let no one up the avenue this
night, and therefore’--

‘But we are armed, and will not be kept back,’ said Nanty. ‘Hark ye,
fellow, were it not better for you to take a guinea and let us in, than
to have us break the door first, and thy pate afterwards? for I won’t
see my comrade die at your door be assured of that.’

‘Why, I dunna know,’ said the fellow; ‘but what cattle were those that
rode by in such hurry?’

‘Why, some of our folk from Bowness, Stoniecultrum, and thereby,’
answered Skelton; ‘Jack Lowther, and old Jephson, and broad Will
Lamplugh, and such like.’

‘Well,’ said Dick Gardener, ‘as sure as there is savour in salt, and
scent in rosemary, I thought it had been the troopers from Carlisle and
Wigton, and the sound brought my heart to my mouth.’

‘Had thought thou wouldst have known the clatter of a cask from the
clash of a broadsword, as well as e’er a quaffer in Cumberland,’ said
Skelton.

‘Come, brother, less of your jaw and more of your legs, if you please,’
said Nanty; ‘every moment we stay is a moment lost. Go to the ladies,
and tell them that Nanty Ewart, of the JUMPING JENNY, has brought
a young gentleman, charged with letters from Scotland to a certain
gentleman of consequence in Cumberland--that the soldiers are out, and
the gentleman is very ill and if he is not received at Fairladies he
must be left either to die at the gate, or to be taken, with all his
papers about him, by the redcoats.’

Away ran Dick Gardener with this message; and, in a few minutes, lights
were seen to flit about, which convinced Fairford, who was now, in
consequence of the halt, a little restored to self-possession, that they
were traversing the front of a tolerably large mansion-house.

‘What if thy friend, Dick Gardener, comes not back again?’ said Jephson
to Skelton.

‘Why, then,’ said the person addressed, ‘I shall owe him just such a
licking as thou, old Jephson, had from Dan Cooke, and will pay as duly
and truly as he did.’

The old man was about to make an angry reply, when his doubts were
silenced by the return of Dick Gardener, who announced that Miss
Arthuret was coming herself as far as the gateway to speak with them.

Nanty Ewart cursed in a low tone the suspicions of old maids and the
churlish scruples of Catholics, that made so many obstacles to helping
a fellow creature, and wished Miss Arthuret a hearty rheumatism or
toothache as the reward of her excursion; but the lady presently
appeared, to cut short further grumbling. She was attended by a
waiting-maid with a lantern, by means of which she examined the party
on the outside, as closely as the imperfect light, and the spars of the
newly-erected gate, would permit.

‘I am sorry we have disturbed you so late, Madam Arthuret,’ said Nanty;
‘but the case is this’--

‘Holy Virgin,’ said she, ‘why do you speak so loud? Pray, are you not
the captain of the SAINTE GENEVIEVE?’

‘Why, aye, ma’am,’ answered Ewart, ‘they call the brig so at Dunkirk,
sure enough; but along shore here, they call her the JUMPING JENNY.’

‘You brought over the holy Father Buonaventure, did you not?’

‘Aye, aye, madam, I have brought over enough of them black cattle,’
answered Nanty. ‘Fie! fie! friend,’ said Miss Arthuret; ‘it is a pity
that the saints should commit these good men to a heretic’s care.’

‘Why, no more they would, ma’am,’ answered Nanty, ‘could they find a
Papist lubber that knew the coast as I do; then I am trusty as steel
to owners, and always look after cargo--live lumber, or dead flesh,
or spirits, all is one to me; and your Catholics have such d--d large
hoods, with pardon, ma’am, that they can sometimes hide two faces under
them. But here is a gentleman dying, with letters about him from the
Laird of Summertrees to the Laird of the Lochs, as they call him, along
Solway, and every minute he lies here is a nail in his coffin.’

‘Saint Mary! what shall we do?’ said Miss Arthuret; ‘we must admit him,
I think, at all risks. You, Richard Gardener, help one of these men to
carry the gentleman up to the Place; and you, Selby, see him lodged at
the end of the long gallery. You are a heretic, captain, but I think you
are trusty, and I know you have been trusted--but if you are imposing on
me’--

‘Not I, madam--never attempt to impose on ladies of your experience--my
practice that way has been all among the young ones. Come, cheerly, Mr.
Fairford--you will be taken good care of--try to walk.’

Alan did so; and, refreshed by his halt, declared himself able to walk
to the house with the sole assistance of the gardener.

‘Why, that’s hearty. Thank thee, Dick, for lending him thine arm’--and
Nanty slipped into his hand the guinea he had promised.--‘Farewell,
then, Mr. Fairford, and farewell, Madam Arthuret, for I have been too
long here.’

So saying, he and his two companions threw themselves on horseback, and
went off at a gallop. Yet, even above the clatter of their hoofs did the
incorrigible Nanty hollo out the old ballad--

  A lovely lass to a friar came,
  To confession a-morning early;--
  ‘In what, my dear, are you to blame?
  Come tell me most sincerely?’
  ‘Alas!  my fault I dare not name--
  But my lad he loved me dearly.’

‘Holy Virgin!’ exclaimed Miss Seraphina, as the unhallowed sounds
reached her ears; ‘what profane heathens be these men, and what frights
and pinches we be put to among them! The saints be good to us, what a
night has this been!--the like never seen at Fairladies. Help me to make
fast the gate, Richard, and thou shalt come down again to wait on it,
lest there come more unwelcome visitors--Not that you are unwelcome,
young gentleman, for it is sufficient that you need such assistance as
we can give you, to make you welcome to Fairladies--only, another time
would have done as well--but, hem! I dare say it is all for the best.
The avenue is none of the smoothest, sir, look to your feet. Richard
Gardener should have had it mown and levelled, but he was obliged to go
on a pilgrimage to Saint Winifred’s Well, in Wales.’ (Here Dick gave
a short dry cough, which, as if he had found it betrayed some internal
feeling a little at variance with what the lady said, he converted into
a muttered SANCTA WINIFREDA, ORA PRO NOBIS. Miss Arthuret, meantime,
proceeded) ‘We never interfere with our servants’ vows or penances,
Master Fairford--I know a very worthy father of your name, perhaps a
relation--I say, we never interfere with our servants vows. Our Lady
forbid they should not know some difference between our service and a
heretic’s.--Take care, sir, you will fall if you have not a care. Alas!
by night and day there are many stumbling-blocks in our paths!’

With more talk to the same purpose, all of which tended to show a
charitable and somewhat silly woman with a strong inclination to her
superstitious devotion, Miss Arthuret entertained her new guest, as,
stumbling at every obstacle which the devotion of his guide, Richard,
had left in the path, he at last, by ascending some stone steps
decorated on the side with griffins, or some such heraldic anomalies,
attained a terrace extending in front of the Place of Fairladies; an
old-fashioned gentleman’s house of some consequence, with its range of
notched gable-ends and narrow windows, relieved by here and there an old
turret about the size of a pepper-box. The door was locked during the
brief absence of the mistress; a dim light glimmered through the sashed
door of the hall, which opened beneath a huge stone porch, loaded with
jessamine and other creepers. All the windows were dark as pitch.

Miss Arthuret tapped at the door. ‘Sister, sister Angelica.’ ‘Who is
there?’ was answered from within; ‘is it you, sister Seraphina?’

‘Yes, yes, undo the door; do you not know my voice?’

‘No doubt, sister,’ said Angelica, undoing bolt and bar; ‘but you know
our charge, and the enemy is watchful to surprise us--INCEDIT SICUT LEO
VORANS, saith the breviary. Whom have you brought here? Oh, sister, what
have you done?’

‘It is a young man,’ said Seraphina, hastening to interrupt her sister’s
remonstrance, ‘a relation, I believe, of our worthy Father Fairford;
left at the gate by the captain of that blessed vessel the SAINTE
GENEVIEVE--almost dead--and charged with dispatches to ‘--

She lowered her voice as she mumbled over the last words.

‘Nay, then, there is no help,’ said Angelica; ‘but it is unlucky.’

During this dialogue between the vestals of Fairladies, Dick Gardener
deposited his burden in a chair, where the young lady, after a moment
of hesitation, expressing a becoming reluctance to touch the hand of a
stranger, put her finger and thumb upon Fairford’s wrist, and counted
his pulse.

‘There is fever here, sister,’ she said; ‘Richard must call Ambrose, and
we must send some of the febrifuge.’

Ambrose arrived presently, a plausible and respectable-looking old
servant, bred in the family, and who had risen from rank to rank in
the Arthuret service till he was become half-physician, half-almoner,
half-butler, and entire governor; that is, when the Father Confessor,
who frequently eased him of the toils of government, chanced to be
abroad. Under the direction, and with the assistance of this venerable
personage, the unlucky Alan Fairford was conveyed to a decent apartment
at the end of a long gallery, and, to his inexpressible relief,
consigned to a comfortable bed. He did not attempt to resist the
prescription of Mr. Ambrose, who not only presented him with the
proposed draught, but proceeded so far as to take a considerable
quantity of blood from him, by which last operation he probably did his
patient much service.





NARRATIVE OF ALAN FAIRFORD, CONTINUED

On the next morning, when Fairford awoke, after no very refreshing
slumbers, in which were mingled many wild dreams of his father and of
Darsie Latimer,--of the damsel in the green mantle and the vestals of
Fairladies,--of drinking small beer with Nanty Ewart and being immersed
in the Solway with the JUMPING JENNY,--he found himself in no condition
to dispute the order of Mr. Ambrose, that he should keep his bed, from
which, indeed, he could not have raised himself without assistance. He
became sensible that his anxiety, and his constant efforts for some days
past, had been too much for his health, and that, whatever might be his
impatience, he could not proceed in his undertaking until his strength
was re-established.

In the meanwhile, no better quarters could have been found for an
invalid. The attendants spoke under their breath, and moved only on
tiptoe--nothing was done unless PAR ORDONNANCE DU MEDECIN. Aesculapius
reigned paramount in the premises at Fairladies. Once a day, the ladies
came in great state to wait upon him and inquire after his health, and
it was then that; Alan’s natural civility, and the thankfulness which
he expressed for their timely and charitable assistance, raised him
considerably in their esteem. He was on the third day removed to a
better apartment than that in which he had been at first accommodated.
When he was permitted to drink a glass of wine, it was of the first
quality; one of those curious old-fashioned cobwebbed bottles being
produced on the occasion, which are only to be found in the crypts of
old country-seats, where they may have lurked undisturbed for more than
half a century.

But however delightful a residence for an invalid, Fairladies, as
its present inmate became soon aware, was not so agreeable to a
convalescent. When he dragged himself to the window so soon as he could
crawl from bed, behold it was closely grated, and commanded no view
except of a little paved court. This was nothing remarkable, most
old Border houses having their windows so secured. But then Fairford
observed, that whosoever entered or left the room always locked the
door with great care and circumspection; and some proposals which he
made to take a walk in the gallery, or even in the garden, were so
coldly received, both by the ladies and their prime minister, Mr.
Ambrose, that he saw plainly such an extension of his privileges as a
guest would not be permitted.

Anxious to ascertain whether this excessive hospitality would permit
him his proper privilege of free agency, he announced to this important
functionary, with grateful thanks for the care with which he had been
attended, his purpose to leave Fairladies next morning, requesting only,
as a continuance of the favours with which he had been loaded, the
loan of a horse to the next town; and, assuring Mr. Ambrose that his
gratitude would not be limited by such, a trifle, he slipped three
guineas into his hand, by way of seconding his proposal. The fingers of
that worthy domestic closed as naturally upon the honorarium, as if a
degree in the learned faculty had given him a right to clutch it; but
his answer concerning Alan’s proposed departure was at first evasive,
and when he was pushed, it amounted to a peremptory assurance that he
could not be permitted to depart to-morrow; it was as much as his life
was worth, and his ladies would not authorize it.

‘I know best what my own life is worth,’ said Alan; ‘and I do not value
it in comparison to the business which requires my instant attention.’

Receiving still no satisfactory answer from Mr. Ambrose, Fairford
thought it best to state his resolution to the ladies themselves, in
the most measured, respectful, and grateful terms; but still such as
expressed a firm determination to depart on the morrow, or next day
at farthest. After some attempts to induce him to stay, on the alleged
score of health, which were so expressed that he was convinced they were
only used to delay his departure, Fairford plainly told them that he was
entrusted with dispatches of consequence to the gentleman known by the
name of Herries, Redgauntlet, and the Laird of the Lochs; and that it
was matter of life and death to deliver them early.

‘I dare say, Sister Angelica,’ said the elder Miss Arthuret, that the
gentleman is honest; and if he is really a relation of Father Fairford,
we can run no risk.’

‘Jesu Maria!’ exclaimed the younger. ‘Oh, fie, Sister Seraphina! Fie,
fie!--‘VADE RETRO--get thee behind me!’

‘Well, well; but, sister--Sister Angelica--let me speak with you in the
gallery.’

So out the ladies rustled in their silks and tissues, and it was a good
half-hour ere they rustled in again, with importance and awe on their
countenances.

‘To tell you the truth, Mr. Fairford, the cause of our desire to delay
you is--there is a religious gentleman in this house at present’--

‘A most excellent person indeed’--said the sister Angelica.

‘An anointed of his Master!’ echoed Seraphina,--‘and we should be glad
that, for conscience’ sake, you would hold some discourse with him
before your departure.’

‘Oho!’ thought Fairford, ‘the murder is out--here is a design of
conversion! I must not affront the good ladies, but I shall soon send
off the priest, I think.’ He then answered aloud, ‘that he should be
happy to converse with any friend of theirs--that in religious matters
he had the greatest respect for every modification of Christianity,
though, he must say, his belief was made up to that in which he had
been educated; nevertheless, if his seeing the religious person they
recommended could in the least show his respect’--

‘It is not quite that,’ said Sister Seraphina, ‘although I am sure the
day is too short to hear him--Father Buonaventure, I mean--speak upon
the concerns of our souls; but’--

‘Come, come, Sister Seraphina,’ said the younger, ‘it is needless
to talk so much about it. His--his Eminence--I mean Father
Buonaventure--will himself explain what he wants this gentleman to
know.’

‘His Eminence!’ said Fairford, surprised--‘is this gentleman so high in
the Catholic Church? The title is given only to Cardinals, I think.’

‘He is not a Cardinal as yet,’ answered Seraphina; ‘but I assure you,
Mr. Fairford, he is as high in rank as he is eminently endowed with good
gifts, and’--

‘Come away,’ said Sister Angelica. ‘Holy Virgin, how you do talk! What
has Mr. Fairford to do with Father Buonaventure’s rank? Only, sir, you
will remember that the Father has been always accustomed to be treated
with the most profound deference; indeed’--

‘Come away, sister,’ said Sister Seraphina, in her turn; ‘who talks now,
I pray you? Mr. Fairford will know how to comport himself.’

‘And we had best both leave the room,’ said the younger lady, ‘for here
his Eminence comes.’

She lowered her voice to a whisper as she pronounced the last words; and
as Fairford was about to reply, by assuring her that any friend of hers
should be treated by him with all the ceremony he could expect, she
imposed silence on him, by holding up her finger.

A solemn and stately step was now heard in the gallery; it might have
proclaimed the approach not merely of a bishop or cardinal, but of
the Sovereign Pontiff himself. Nor could the sound have been more
respectfully listened to by the two ladies, had it announced that the
Head of the Church was approaching in person. They drew themselves,
like sentinels on duty, one on each side of the door by which the
long gallery communicated with Fairford’s apartment, and stood there
immovable, and with countenances expressive of the deepest reverence.

The approach of Father Buonaventure was so slow, that Fairford had time
to notice all this, and to marvel in his mind what wily and ambitious
priest could have contrived to subject his worthy but simple-minded
hostesses to such superstitious trammels. Father Buonaventure’s entrance
and appearance in some degree accounted for the whole.

He was a man of middle life, about forty or upwards; but either care, or
fatigue, or indulgence, had brought on the appearance of premature
old age, and given to his fine features a cast of seriousness or even
sadness. A noble countenance, however, still remained; and though his
complexion was altered, and wrinkles stamped upon his brow in many a
melancholy fold, still the lofty forehead, the full and well-opened eye,
and the well-formed nose, showed how handsome in better days he
must have been. He was tall, but lost the advantage of his height
by stooping; and the cane which he wore always in his hand, and
occasionally used, as well as his slow though majestic gait, seemed to
intimate that his form and limbs felt already some touch of infirmity.
The colour of his hair could not be discovered, as, according to the
fashion, he wore a periwig. He was handsomely, though gravely dressed in
a secular habit, and had a cockade in his hat; circumstances which did
not surprise Fairford, who knew that a military disguise was very often
assumed by the seminary priests, whose visits to England, or residence
there, subjected them to legal penalties.

As this stately person entered the apartment, the two ladies facing
inward, like soldiers on their post when about to salute a superior
officer, dropped on either hand of the father a curtsy so profound that
the hoop petticoats which performed the feat seemed to sink down to
the very floor, nay, through it, as if a trap-door had opened for the
descent of the dames who performed this act of reverence.

The father seemed accustomed to such homage, profound as it was; he
turned his person a little way first towards one sister, and then
towards the other, while, with a gracious inclination of his person,
which certainly did not amount to a bow, he acknowledged their curtsy.
But he passed forward without addressing them, and seemed by doing so to
intimate that their presence in the apartment was unnecessary.

They accordingly glided out of the room, retreating backwards, with
hands clasped and eyes cast upwards, as if imploring blessings on the
religious man whom they venerated so highly. The door of the apartment
was shut after them, but not before Fairford had perceived that there
were one or two men in the gallery, and that, contrary to what he had
before observed, the door, though shut, was not locked on the outside.

‘Can the good souls apprehend danger from me to this god of their
idolatry?’ thought Fairford. But he had no time to make further
observations, for the stranger had already reached the middle of his
apartment.

Fairford rose to receive him respectfully, but as he fixed his eyes on
the visitor, he thought that the father avoided his looks. His reasons
for remaining incognito were cogent enough to account for this, and
Fairford hastened to relieve him, by looking downwards in his turn;
but when again he raised his face, he found the broad light eye of the
stranger so fixed on him that he was almost put out of countenance by
the steadiness of his gaze. During this time they remained standing.

‘Take your seat, sir,’ said the father; ‘you have been an invalid.’

He spoke with the tone of one who desires an inferior to be seated in
his presence, and his voice was full and melodious.

Fairford, somewhat surprised to find himself overawed by the airs of
superiority, which could be only properly exercised towards one over
whom religion gave the speaker influence, sat down at his bidding, as
if moved by springs, and was at a loss how to assert the footing of
equality on which he felt that they ought to stand. The stranger kept
the advantage which he had obtained.

‘Your name, sir, I am informed, is Fairford?’ said the father.

Alan answered by a bow.

‘Called to the Scottish bar,’ continued his visitor, ‘There is, I
believe, in the West, a family of birth and rank called Fairford of
Fairford.’

Alan thought this a strange observation from a foreign ecclesiastic,
as his name intimated Father Buonaventure to be; but only answered he
believed there was such, a family.

‘Do you count kindred with them, Mr. Fairford?’ continued the inquirer.

‘I have not the honour to lay such a claim,’ said Fairford.

‘My father’s industry has raised his family from a low and obscure
situation--I have no hereditary claim to distinction of any kind. May I
ask the cause of these inquiries?’

‘You will learn it presently,’ said Father Buonaventure, who had given
a dry and dissatisfied HEM at the young man’s acknowledging a plebeian
descent. He then motioned to him to be silent, and proceeded with his
queries.

‘Although not of condition, you are, doubtless, by sentiments and
education, a man of honour and a gentleman?’

‘I hope so, sir,’ said Alan, colouring with displeasure. ‘I have not
been accustomed to have it questioned.’

‘Patience, young man,’ said the unperturbed querist--‘we are on serious
business, and no idle etiquette must prevent its being discussed
seriously. You are probably aware that you speak to a person proscribed
by the severe and unjust laws of the present government?’

‘I am aware of the statute 1700, chapter 3,’ said Alan, ‘banishing from
the realm priests and trafficking Papists, and punishing by death, on
summary conviction, any such person who being so banished may return.
But I have no means of knowing you, sir, to be one of those persons; and
I think your prudence may recommend to you to keep your own counsel.’

‘It is sufficient, sir; and I have no apprehensions of disagreeable
consequences from your having seen me in this house,’ said the priest.

‘Assuredly no,’ said Alan. ‘I consider myself as indebted for my life to
the mistresses of Fairladies; and it would be a vile requital on my
part to pry into or make known what I may have seen or heard under
this hospitable roof. If I were to meet the Pretender himself in such
a situation, he should, even at the risk of a little stretch to my
loyalty, be free from any danger from my indiscretion.’

‘The Pretender!’ said the priest, with some angry emphasis; but
immediately softened his tone and added, ‘No doubt, however, that
person is a pretender; and some people think his pretensions are not ill
founded. But, before running into politics, give me leave to say, that I
am surprised to find a gentleman of your opinions in habits of intimacy
with Mr. Maxwell of Summertrees and Mr. Redgauntlet, and the medium of
conducting the intercourse betwixt them.’

‘Pardon me, sir,’ replied Alan Fairford; ‘I do not aspire to the honour
of being reputed their confidant or go-between. My concern with those
gentlemen is limited to one matter of business, dearly interesting to
me, because it concerns the safety--perhaps the life--of my dearest
friend.’

‘Would you have any objection to entrust me with the cause of your
journey?’ said Father Buonaventure. ‘My advice may be of service to you,
and my influence with one or both these gentlemen is considerable.’

Fairford hesitated a moment, and, hastily revolving all circumstances,
concluded that he might perhaps receive some advantage from propitiating
this personage; while, on the other hand, he endangered nothing by
communicating to him the occasion of his journey. He, therefore, after
stating shortly that he hoped Mr. Buonaventure would render him the same
confidence which he required on his part, gave a short account of Darsie
Latimer--of the mystery which hung over his family--and of the disaster
which had befallen him. Finally, of his own resolution to seek for his
friend, and to deliver him, at the peril of his own life.

The Catholic priest, whose manner it seemed to be to avoid all
conversation which did not arise from his own express motion, made
no remarks upon what he had heard, but only asked one or two abrupt
questions, where Alan’s narrative appeared less clear to him; then
rising from his seat, he took two turns through the apartment, muttering
between his teeth, with emphasis, the word ‘madman!’ But apparently he
was in the habit of keeping all violent emotions under restraint; for he
presently addressed Fairford with the most perfect indifference.

‘If,’ said he, ‘you thought you could do so without breach of
confidence, I wish you would have the goodness to show me the letter
of Mr. Maxwell of Summertrees. I desire to look particularly at the
address.’

Seeing no cause to decline this extension of his confidence, Alan,
without hesitation, put the letter into his hand. Having turned it
round as old Trumbull and Nanty Ewart had formerly done, and, like them,
having examined the address with much minuteness, he asked whether he
had observed these words, pointing to a pencil-writing upon the under
side of the letter. Fairford answered in the negative, and, looking
at the letter, read with surprise, ‘CAVE NE LITERAS BELLEROPHONTIS
ADFERRES’; a caution which coincided so exactly with the provost’s
admonition, that he would do well to inspect the letter of which he was
bearer, that he was about to spring up and attempt an escape, he knew
not wherefore, or from whom.

‘Sit still, young man,’ said the father, with the same tone of authority
which reigned in his whole manner, although mingled with stately
courtesy. ‘You are in no danger--my character shall be a pledge for your
safety. By whom do you suppose these words have been written?’

Fairford could have answered, ‘By Nanty Ewart,’ for he remembered seeing
that person scribble something with a pencil, although he was not well
enough to observe with accuracy where or upon what. But not knowing
what suspicions, or what worse consequences the seamen’s interest in his
affairs might draw upon him, he judged it best to answer that he knew
not the hand.

Father Buonaventure was again silent for a moment or two, which he
employed in surveying the letter with the strictest attention; then
stepped to the window, as if to examine the address and writing of the
envelope with the assistance of a stronger light, and Alan Fairford
beheld him, with no less amazement than high displeasure, coolly and
deliberately break the seal, open the letter, and peruse the contents.

‘Stop, sir, hold!’ he exclaimed, so soon as his astonishment permitted
him to express his resentment in words; ‘by what right do you dare’--

‘Peace, young gentleman,’ said the father, repelling him with a wave
of his hand; ‘be assured I do not act without warrant--nothing can pass
betwixt Mr. Maxwell and Mr. Redgauntlet that I am not fully entitled to
know.’

‘It may be so,’ said Alan, extremely angry; ‘but though you may be these
gentlemen’s father confessor, you are not mine; and in breaking the seal
of a letter entrusted to my care, you have done me’--

‘No injury, I assure you,’ answered the unperturbed priest; ‘on the
contrary, it may be a service.’

‘I desire no advantage at such a rate, or to be obtained in such a
manner,’ answered Fairford; ‘restore me the letter instantly, or’--

‘As you regard your own safety,’ said the priest, ‘forbear all injurious
expressions, and all menacing gestures. I am not one who can be
threatened or insulted with impunity; and there are enough within
hearing to chastise any injury or affront offered to me, in case I may
think it unbecoming to protect or avenge myself with my own hand.’

In saying this, the father assumed an air of such fearlessness and calm
authority, that the young lawyer, surprised and overawed, forbore, as he
had intended, to snatch the letter from his hand, and confined himself
to bitter complaints of the impropriety of his conduct, and of the light
in which he himself must be placed to Redgauntlet should he present him
a letter with a broken seal.

‘That,’ said Father Buonaventure, ‘shall be fully cared for. I will
myself write to Redgauntlet, and enclose Maxwell’s letter, provided
always you continue to desire to deliver it, after perusing the
contents.’

He then restored the letter to Fairford, and, observing that he
hesitated to peruse it, said emphatically, ‘Read it, for it concerns
you.’

This recommendation, joined to what Provost Crosbie had formerly
recommended, and to the warning which he doubted not that Nanty intended
to convey by his classical allusion, decided Fairford’s resolution. ‘If
these correspondents,’ he thought, ‘are conspiring against my person,
I have a right to counterplot them; self-preservation, as well as my
friend’s safety, require that I should not be too scrupulous.’

So thinking, he read the letter, which was in the following words:--

‘DEAR RUGGED AND DANGEROUS, ‘Will you never cease meriting your old
nick-name? You have springed your dottrel, I find, and what is the
consequence?--why, that there will be hue and cry after you presently.
The bearer is a pert young lawyer, who has brought a formal complaint
against you, which, luckily, he has preferred in a friendly court.
Yet, favourable as the judge was disposed to be, it was with the utmost
difficulty that cousin Jenny and I could keep him to his tackle. He
begins to be timid, suspicious, and untractable, and I fear Jenny will
soon bend her brows on him in vain. I know not what to advise--the
lad who carries this is a good lad--active for his friend--and I have
pledged my honour he shall have no personal ill-usage. Pledged my
honour, remark these words, and remember I can be rugged and dangerous
as well, as my neighbours. But I have not ensured him against a short
captivity, and as he is a stirring active fellow, I see no remedy but
keeping him out of the way till this business of the good Father B----
is safely blown over, which God send it were!--Always thine, even should
I be once more CRAIG-IN-PERIL.’

‘What think you, young man, of the danger you have been about to
encounter so willingly?’

‘As strangely,’ replied Alan Fairford, ‘as of the extraordinary means
which you have been at present pleased to use for the discovery of Mr.
Maxwell’s purpose.

‘Trouble not yourself to account for my conduct,’ said the father; ‘I
have a warrant for what I do, and fear no responsibility. But tell me
what is your present purpose.’

‘I should not perhaps name it to you, whose own safety may be
implicated.’

‘I understand you,’ answered the father; ‘you would appeal to the
existing government? That can at no rate be permitted--we will rather
detain you at Fairladies by compulsion.’

‘You will probably,’ said Fairford, ‘first weigh the risk of such a
proceeding in a free country.’

‘I have incurred more formidable hazard,’ said the priest, smiling; ‘yet
I am willing to find a milder expedient. Come; let us bring the matter
to a compromise.’ And he assumed a conciliating graciousness of
manner, which struck Fairford as being rather too condescending for the
occasion; ‘I presume you will be satisfied to remain here in seclusion
for a day or two longer, provided I pass my solemn word to you that you
shall meet with the person whom you seek after--meet with him in perfect
safety, and, I trust, in good health, and be afterwards both at liberty
to return to Scotland, or dispose of yourselves as each of you may be
minded?’

‘I respect the VERBUM SACERDOTIS as much as can reasonably be expected
from a Protestant,’ answered Fairford; ‘but methinks, you can scarce
expect me to repose so much confidence in the word of an unknown person
as is implied in the guarantee which you offer me.’

‘I am not accustomed, sir,’ said the father, in a very haughty tone, ‘to
have my word disputed. But,’ he added, while the angry hue passed from
his cheek, after a moment’s reflection, ‘you know me not, and ought to
be excused. I will repose more confidence in your honour than you seem
willing to rest upon mine; and, since we are so situated that one must
rely upon the other’s faith, I will cause you to be set presently at
liberty, and furnished with the means of delivering your letter as
addressed, provided that now, knowing the contents, you think it safe
for yourself to execute the commission.’

Alan Fairford paused. ‘I cannot see,’ he at length replied, ‘how I can
proceed with respect to the accomplishment of my sole purpose, which is
the liberation of my friend, without appealing to the law and obtaining
the assistance of a magistrate. If I present this singular letter of
Mr. Maxwell, with the contents of which I have become so unexpectedly
acquainted, I shall only share his captivity.’

‘And if you apply to a magistrate, young man, you will bring ruin on
these hospitable ladies, to whom, in all human probability, you owe your
life. You cannot obtain a warrant for your purpose, without giving a
clear detail of all the late scenes through which you have passed. A
magistrate would oblige you to give a complete account of yourself,
before arming you with his authority against a third party; and in
giving such an account, the safety of these ladies will necessarily be
compromised. A hundred spies have had, and still have, their eyes
upon this mansion; but God will protect his own.’--He crossed himself
devoutly, and then proceeded,--‘You can take an hour to think of your
best plan, and I will pledge myself to forward it thus far, provided
it be not asking you to rely more on my word than your prudence can
warrant. You shall go to Redgauntlet,--I name him plainly, to show
my confidence in you,--and you shall deliver him this letter of Mr.
Maxwell’s, with one from me, in which I will enjoin him to set your
friend at liberty, or at least to make no attempts upon your own person,
either by detention or otherwise. If you can trust me thus far,’ he
said, with a proud emphasis on the words ‘I will on my side see you
depart from this place with the most perfect confidence that you will
not return armed with powers to drag its inmates to destruction. You
are young and inexperienced--bred to a profession also which sharpens
suspicion, and gives false views of human nature. I have seen much of
the world, and have known better than most men how far mutual confidence
is requisite in managing affairs of consequence.’

He spoke with an air of superiority, even of authority, by which
Fairford, notwithstanding his own internal struggles, was silenced and
overawed so much, that it was not till the father had turned to leave
the apartment that he found words to ask him what the consequences would
be, should he decline to depart on the terms proposed.

‘You must then, for the safety of all parties, remain for some days
an inhabitant of Fairladies, where we have the means of detaining you,
which self-preservation will in that case compel us to make use of. Your
captivity will be short; for matters cannot long remain as they are. The
cloud must soon rise, or it must sink upon us for ever. BENEDICITE!’

With these words he left the apartment.

Fairford, upon his departure, felt himself much at a loss what course to
pursue. His line of education, as well as his father’s tenets in matters
of church and state, had taught him a holy horror for Papists, and a
devout belief in whatever had been said of the Punic faith of Jesuits,
and of the expedients of mental reservation by which the Catholic
priests in general were supposed to evade keeping faith with heretics.
Yet there was something of majesty, depressed indeed and overclouded,
but still grand and imposing, in the manner and words of Father
Buonaventure, which it was difficult to reconcile with those
preconceived opinions which imputed subtlety and fraud to his sect and
order. Above all, Alan was aware that if he accepted not his freedom
upon the terms offered him, he was likely to be detained by force; so
that, in every point of view, he was a gainer by accepting them.

A qualm, indeed, came across him, when he considered, as a lawyer, that
this father was probably, in the eye of law, a traitor; and that there
was an ugly crime on the Statute Book, called misprision of treason. On
the other hand, whatever he might think or suspect, he could not take
upon him to say that the man was a priest, whom he had never seen in the
dress of his order, or in the act of celebrating mass; so that he felt
himself at liberty to doubt of that respecting which he possessed no
legal proof. He therefore arrived at the conclusion, that he would
do well to accept his liberty, and proceed to Redgauntlet under the
guarantee of Father Buonaventure, which he scarce doubted would be
sufficient to save him from personal inconvenience. Should he once
obtain speech of that gentleman, he felt the same confidence as
formerly, that he might be able to convince him of the rashness of
his conduct, should he not consent to liberate Darsie Latimer. At all
events, he should learn where his friend was, and how circumstanced.

Having thus made up his mind, Alan waited anxiously for the expiration
of the hour which had been allowed him for deliberation. He was not kept
on the tenter-hooks of impatience an instant longer than the appointed
moment arrived, for, even as the clock struck, Ambrose appeared at the
door of the gallery, and made a sign that Alan should follow him. He did
so, and after passing through some of the intricate avenues common in
old houses, was ushered into a small apartment, commodiously fitted
up, in which he found Father Buonaventure reclining on a couch, in the
attitude of a man exhausted by fatigue or indisposition. On a small
table beside him, a silver embossed salver sustained a Catholic book of
prayer, a small flask of medicine, a cordial, and a little tea-cup of
old china. Ambrose did not enter the room--he only bowed profoundly, and
closed the door with the least possible noise, so soon as Fairford had
entered.

‘Sit down, young man,’ said the father, with the same air of
condescension which had before surprised, and rather offended
Fairford. ‘You have been ill, and I know too well by my own case that
indisposition requires indulgence. Have you,’ he continued, so soon as
he saw him seated, ‘resolved to remain, or to depart?’

‘To depart,’ said Alan, ‘under the agreement that you will guarantee my
safety with the extraordinary person who has conducted himself in such a
lawless manner toward my friend, Darsie Latimer.’

‘Do not judge hastily, young man,’ replied the father. ‘Redgauntlet
has the claims of a guardian over his ward, in respect to the young
gentleman, and a right to dictate his place of residence, although he
may have been injudicious in selecting the means by which he thinks to
enforce his authority.’

‘His situation as an attainted person abrogates such rights,’ said
Fairford, hastily.

‘Surely,’ replied the priest, smiling at the young lawyer’s readiness;
‘in the eye of those who acknowledge the justice of the attainder--but
that do not I. However, sir, here is the guarantee--look at its
contents, and do not again carry the letters of Uriah.’

Fairford read these words:--

‘GOOD FRIEND, ‘We send you hither a young man desirous to know the
situation of your ward, since he came under your paternal authority, and
hopeful of dealing with you for having your relative put at large. This
we recommend to your prudence, highly disapproving, at the same time, of
any force or coercion when such can be avoided, and wishing, therefore,
that the bearer’s negotiation may be successful. At all rates, however,
the bearer hath our pledged word for his safety and freedom, which,
therefore, you are to see strictly observed, as you value our honour and
your own. We further wish to converse with you, with as small loss of
time as may be, having matters of the utmost confidence to impart.
For this purpose we desire you to repair hither with all haste, and
thereupon we bid you heartily farewell. P. B.’

‘You will understand, sir,’ said the father, when he saw that Alan had
perused his letter, ‘that, by accepting charge of this missive, you bind
yourself to try the effect of it before having recourse to any legal
means, as you term them, for your friend’s release.’

‘There are a few ciphers added to this letter,’ said Fairford, when he
had perused the paper attentively,--‘may I inquire what their import
is?’

‘They respect my own affairs,’ answered the father, briefly; ‘and have
no concern whatever with yours.’

‘It seems to me, however,’ replied Alan, ‘natural to suppose’--

‘Nothing must be supposed incompatible with my honour,’ replied the
priest, interrupting him; ‘when such as I am confer favours, we expect
that they shall be accepted with gratitude, or declined with thankful
respect--not questioned or discussed.’

‘I will accept your letter, then,’ said Fairford, after a minute’s
consideration, ‘and the thanks you expect shall be most liberally paid,
if the result answer what you teach me to expect.’

‘God only commands the issue,’ said Father Buonaventure. ‘Man uses
means. You understand that, by accepting this commission, you engage
yourself in honour to try the effect of my letter upon Mr. Redgauntlet,
before you have recourse to informations or legal warrants?’

‘I hold myself bound, as a man of good faith and honour, to do so,’ said
Fairford.

‘Well, I trust you,’ said the father. ‘I will now tell you that an
express, dispatched by me last night, has, I hear, brought Redgauntlet
to a spot many miles nearer this place, where he will not find it safe
to attempt any violence on your friend, should he be rash enough to
follow the advice of Mr. Maxwell of Summertrees rather than my commands.
We now understand each other.’

He extended his hand towards Alan, who was about to pledge his faith in
the usual form by grasping it with his own, when the father drew
back hastily. Ere Alan had time to comment upon this repulse, a small
side-door, covered with tapestry, was opened; the hangings were
drawn aside, and a lady, as if by sudden apparition, glided into the
apartment. It was neither of the Misses Arthuret, but a woman in the
prime of life, and in the full-blown expansion of female beauty, tall,
fair, and commanding in her aspect. Her locks, of paly gold, were taught
to fall over a brow, which, with the stately glance of the large, open,
blue eyes, might have become Juno herself; her neck and bosom were
admirably formed, and of a dazzling whiteness. She was rather inclined
to EMBONPOINT, but not more than became her age, of apparently thirty
years. Her step was that of a queen, but it was of Queen Vashti, not
Queen Esther--the bold and commanding, not the retiring beauty.

Father Buonaventure raised himself on the couch, angrily, as if
displeased by this intrusion. ‘How now, madam,’ he said, with some
sternness; ‘why have we the honour of your company?’

‘Because it is my pleasure,’ answered the lady, composedly.

‘Your pleasure, madam!’ he repeated in the same angry tone.

‘My pleasure, sir,’ she continued, ‘which always keeps exact pace with
my duty. I had heard you were unwell--let me hope it is only business
which produces this seclusion.’

‘I am well,’ he replied; ‘perfectly well, and I thank you for your
care--but we are not alone, and this young man’--

‘That young man?’ she said, bending her large and serious eye on
Alan Fairford, as if she had been for the first time aware of his
presence,--‘may I ask who he is?’

‘Another time, madam; you shall learn his history after he is gone. His
presence renders it impossible for me to explain further.’

‘After he is gone may be too late,’ said the lady; ‘and what is his
presence to me, when your safety is at stake? He is the heretic lawyer
whom those silly fools, the Arthurets, admitted into this house at a
time when they should have let their own father knock at the door in
vain, though the night had been a wild one. You will not surely dismiss
him?’

‘Your own impatience can alone make that step perilous,’ said the
father; ‘I have resolved to take it--do not let your indiscreet
zeal, however excellent its motive, add any unnecessary risk to the
transaction.’

‘Even so?’ said the lady, in a tone of reproach, yet mingled with
respect and apprehension. ‘And thus you will still go forward, like a
stag upon the hunter’s snares, with undoubting confidence, after all
that has happened?’

‘Peace, madam,’ said Father Buonaventure, rising up; ‘be silent, or quit
the apartment; my designs do not admit of female criticism.’

To this peremptory command the lady seemed about to make a sharp reply;
but she checked herself, and pressing her lips strongly together, as if
to secure the words from bursting from them which were already formed
upon her tongue, she made a deep reverence, partly as it seemed in
reproach, partly in respect, and left the room as suddenly as she had
entered it.

The father looked disturbed at this incident, which he seemed sensible
could not but fill Fairford’s imagination with an additional throng of
bewildering suspicions; he bit his lip and muttered something to himself
as he walked through the apartment; then suddenly turned to his visitor
with a smile of much sweetness, and a countenance in which every rougher
expression was exchanged for those of courtesy and kindness.

‘The visit we have been just honoured with, my young friend, has given
you,’ he said, ‘more secrets to keep than I would have wished
you burdened with. The lady is a person of condition--of rank and
fortune--but nevertheless is so circumstanced that the mere fact of her
being known to be in this country would occasion many evils. I should
wish you to observe secrecy on this subject, even to Redgauntlet or
Maxwell, however much I trust them in all that concerns my own affairs.’

‘I can have no occasion,’ replied Fairford, ‘for holding any discussion
with these gentlemen, or with any others, on the circumstance which
I have just witnessed--it could only have become the subject of my
conversation by mere accident, and I will now take care to avoid the
subject entirely.’

‘You will do well, sir, and I thank you,’ said the father, throwing much
dignity into the expression of obligation which he meant to convey. ‘The
time may perhaps come when you will learn what it is to have obliged one
of my condition. As to the lady, she has the highest merit, and nothing
can be said of her justly which would not redound to her praise.
Nevertheless--in short, sir, we wander at present as in a morning
mist--the sun will, I trust, soon rise and dispel it, when all that now
seems mysterious will be fully revealed--or it will sink into rain,’
he added, in a solemn tone, ‘and then explanation will be of little
consequence.--Adieu, sir; I wish you well.’

He made a graceful obeisance, and vanished through the same side-door by
which the lady had entered; and Alan thought he heard their voices high
in dispute in the adjoining apartment.

Presently afterwards, Ambrose entered, and told him that a horse and
guide waited him beneath the terrace.

‘The good Father Buonaventure,’ added the butler, ‘has been graciously
pleased to consider your situation, and desired me to inquire whether
you have any occasion for a supply of money?’

‘Make my respects to his reverence,’ answered Fairford, ‘and assure
him I am provided in that particular. I beg you also to make my
acknowledgements to the Misses Arthuret, and assure them that their kind
hospitality, to which I probably owe my life, shall be remembered with
gratitude as long as that life lasts. You yourself, Mr. Ambrose, must
accept of my kindest thanks for your skill and attention.’

Mid these acknowledgements they left the house, descended the terrace,
and reached the spot where the gardener, Fairford’s old acquaintance,
waited for him, mounted upon one horse and leading another.

Bidding adieu to Ambrose, our young lawyer mounted, and rode down the
avenue, often looking back to the melancholy and neglected dwelling
in which he had witnessed such strange scenes, and musing upon the
character of its mysterious inmates, especially the noble and almost
regal-seeming priest, and the beautiful but capricious dame, who, if
she was really Father Buonaventure’s penitent, seemed less docile to the
authority of the church than, as Alan conceived, the Catholic discipline
permitted. He could not indeed help being sensible that the whole
deportment of these persons differed much from his preconceived notions
of a priest and devotee. Father Buonaventure, in particular, had
more natural dignify and less art and affectation in his manner, than
accorded with the idea which Calvinists were taught to entertain of that
wily and formidable person, a Jesuitical missionary.

While reflecting on these things, he looked back so frequently at the
house, that Dick Gardener, a forward, talkative fellow, who began
to tire of silence, at length said to him, ‘I think you will know
Fairladies when you see it again, sir?’

‘I dare say I shall, Richard,’ answered Fairford good-humouredly.
‘I wish I knew as well where I am to go next. But you can tell me,
perhaps?’

‘Your worship should know better than I,’ said Dick Gardener;
‘nevertheless, I have a notion you are going where all you Scotsmen
should be sent, whether you will or no.’

‘Not to the devil, I hope, good Dick?’ said Fairford.

‘Why, no. That is a road which you may travel as heretics; but as
Scotsmen, I would only send you three-fourths of the way--and that is
back to Scotland again--always craving your honour’s pardon.’

‘Does our journey lie that way?’ said Fairford.

‘As far as the waterside,’ said Richard. ‘I am to carry you to old
Father Crackenthorp’s, and then you are within a spit and a stride of
Scotland, as the saying is. But mayhap you may think twice of going
thither, for all that; for Old England is fat feeding-ground for
north-country cattle.’





NARRATIVE OF DARSIE LATIMER

Our history must now, as the old romancers wont to say, ‘leave to
tell’ of the quest of Alan Fairford, and instruct our readers of the
adventures which befell Darsie Latimer, left as he was in the precarious
custody of his self-named tutor, the Laird of the Lochs of Solway,
to whose arbitrary pleasure he found it necessary for the present to
conform himself.

In consequence of this prudent resolution, and although he did not
assume such a disguise without some sensations of shame and degradation,
Darsie permitted Cristal Nixon to place over his face, and secure by a
string, one of those silk masks which ladies frequently wore to preserve
their complexions, when exposed to the air during long journeys on
horseback. He remonstrated somewhat more vehemently against the long
riding-skirt, which converted his person from the waist into the female
guise, but was obliged to concede this point also.

The metamorphosis was then complete; for the fair reader must be
informed, that in those rude times, the ladies, when they honoured the
masculine dress by assuming any part of it, wore just such hats, coats,
and waistcoats as the male animals themselves made use of, and had no
notion of the elegant compromise betwixt male and female attire, which
has now acquired, PAR EXCELLENCE, the name of a HABIT. Trolloping
things our mothers must have looked, with long square-cut coats, lacking
collars, and with waistcoats plentifully supplied with a length of
pocket, which hung far downwards from the middle. But then they had
some advantage from the splendid colours, lace, and gay embroidery
which masculine attire then exhibited; and, as happens in many similar
instances, the finery of the materials made amends for the want of
symmetry and grace of form in the garments themselves. But this is a
digression.

In the court of the old mansion, half manor-place, half farm-house, or
rather a decayed manor-house, converted into an abode for a Cumberland
tenant, stood several saddled horses. Four or five of them were mounted
by servants or inferior retainers, all of whom were well armed with
sword, pistol, and carabine. But two had riding furniture for the use
of females--the one being accoutred with a side-saddle, the other with a
pillion attached to the saddle.

Darsie’s heart beat quicker within him; he easily comprehended that one
of these was intended for his own use; and his hopes suggested that the
other was designed for that of the fair Green Mantle, whom, according
to his established practice, he had adopted for the queen of his
affections, although his opportunities of holding communication with her
had not exceeded the length of a silent supper on one occasion, and the
going down a country-dance on another. This, however, was no unwonted
mood of passion with Darsie Latimer, upon whom Cupid was used to triumph
only in the degree of a Mahratta conqueror, who overruns a province with
the rapidity of lightning, but finds it impossible to retain it beyond
a very brief space. Yet this new love was rather more serious than the
scarce skinned-up wounds which his friend Fairford used to ridicule.
The damsel had shown a sincere interest in his behalf; and the air of
mystery with which that interest was veiled, gave her, to his lively
imagination, the character of a benevolent and protecting spirit, as
much as that of a beautiful female.

At former times, the romance attending his short-lived attachments
had been of his own creating, and had disappeared as soon as ever he
approached more closely to the object with which he had invested it.
On the present occasion, it really flowed from external circumstances,
which might have interested less susceptible feelings, and an
imagination less lively than that of Darsie Latimer, young,
inexperienced, and enthusiastic as he was.

He watched, therefore, anxiously to whose service the palfrey bearing
the lady’s saddle was destined. But ere any female appeared to occupy
it, he was himself summoned to take his seat on the pillion behind
Cristal Nixon, amid the grins of his old acquaintance Jan who helped him
to horse, and the unrestrained laughter of Cicely, who displayed on the
occasion a case of teeth which might have rivalled ivory.

Latimer was at an age when being an object of general ridicule even to
clowns and milkmaids was not a matter of indifference, and he longed
heartily to have laid his horse-whip across Jan’s shoulders. That,
however, was a solacement of his feelings which was not at the moment to
be thought of; and Cristal Nixon presently put an end to his unpleasant
situation, by ordering the riders to go on. He himself kept the centre
of the troop, two men riding before and two behind him, always, as it
seemed to Darsie, having their eye upon him, to prevent any attempt to
escape. He could see from time to time, when the straight line of the
road, or the advantage of an ascent permitted him, that another troop
of three or four riders followed them at about a quarter of a mile’s
distance, amongst whom he could discover the tall form of Redgauntlet,
and the powerful action of his gallant black horse. He had little
doubt that Green Mantle made one of the party, though he was unable to
distinguish her from the others.

In this manner they travelled from six in the morning until nearly ten
of the clock, without Darsie exchanging a word with any one; for he
loathed the very idea of entering into conversation with Cristal Nixon,
against whom he seemed to feel an instinctive aversion; nor was that
domestic’s saturnine and sullen disposition such as to have encouraged
advances, had he thought of making them.

At length the party halted for the purpose of refreshment; but as they
had hitherto avoided all villages and inhabited places upon their route,
so they now stopped at one of those large ruinous Dutch barns, which
are sometimes found in the fields, at a distance from the farm-houses to
which they belong. Yet in this desolate place some preparations had been
made for their reception. There were in the end of the barn racks filled
with provender for the horses, and plenty of provisions for the party
were drawn from the trusses of straw, under which the baskets that
contained them had been deposited. The choicest of these were selected
and arranged apart by Cristal Nixon, while the men of the party threw
themselves upon the rest, which he abandoned to their discretion. In a
few minutes afterwards the rearward party arrived and dismounted, and
Redgauntlet himself entered the barn with the green-mantled maiden by
his side. He presented her to Darsie with these words:--

‘It is time you two should know each other better. I promised you my
confidence, Darsie, and the time is come for reposing it. But first we
will have our breakfast; and then, when once more in the saddle, I will
tell you that which it is necessary that you should know. Salute Lilias,
Darsie.’

The command was sudden, and surprised Latimer, whose confusion was
increased by the perfect ease and frankness with which Lilias offered at
once her cheek and her hand, and pressing his as she rather took it than
gave her own, said very frankly, ‘Dearest Darsie, how rejoiced I am that
our uncle has at last permitted us to become acquainted!’

Darsie’s head turned round; and it was perhaps well that Redgauntlet
called on him to sit down, as even that movement served to hide his
confusion. There is an old song which says--

  --when ladies are willing,
  A man can but look like a fool;

And on the same principle Darsie Latimer’s looks at this unexpected
frankness of reception, would have formed an admirable vignette for
illustrating the passage. ‘Dearest Darsie,’ and such a ready, nay, eager
salute of lip and hand! It was all very gracious, no doubt--and ought to
have been received with much gratitude; but, constituted as our friend’s
temper was, nothing could be more inconsistent with his tone of feeling.
If a hermit had proposed to him to club for a pot of beer, the illusion
of his reverend sanctity could not have been dispelled more effectually
than the divine qualities of Green Mantle faded upon the ill-imagined
frank-heartedness of poor Lilias. Vexed with her forwardness, and
affronted at having once more cheated himself, Darsie could hardly help
muttering two lines of the song we have already quoted:

  The fruit that must fall without shaking
  Is rather too mellow for me.

And yet it was pity for her too--she was a very pretty young woman--his
fancy had scarcely overrated her in that respect--and the slight
derangement of the beautiful brown locks which escaped in natural
ringlets from under her riding-hat, with the bloom which exercise had
brought into her cheek, made her even more than usually fascinating.
Redgauntlet modified the sternness of his look when it was turned
towards her, and in addressing her, used a softer tone than his usual
deep bass. Even the grim features of Cristal Nixon relaxed when he
attended on her, and it was then, if ever, that his misanthropical
visage expressed some sympathy with the rest of humanity.

‘How can she,’ thought Latimer, ‘look so like an angel, yet be so mere
a mortal after all? How could so much seeming modesty have so much
forwardness of manner, when she ought to have been most reserved? How
can her conduct be reconciled to the grace and ease of her general
deportment?’

The confusion of thoughts which occupied Darsie’s imagination, gave to
his looks a disordered appearance, and his inattention to the food which
was placed before him, together with his silence and absence of mind,
induced Lilias solicitously to inquire, whether he did not feel some
return of the disorder under which he had suffered so lately. This led
Mr. Redgauntlet, who seemed also lost in his own contemplations, to
raise his eyes, and join in the same inquiry with some appearance of
interest. Latimer explained to both that he was perfectly well.

‘It is well it is so,’ answered Redgauntlet; ‘for we have that before
us which will brook no delay from indisposition--we have not, as Hotspur
says, leisure to be sick.’

Lilias, on her part, endeavoured to prevail upon Darsie to partake of
the food which she offered him, with a kindly and affectionate courtesy
corresponding to the warmth of the interest she had displayed at their
meeting; but so very natural, innocent, and pure in its character, that
it would have been impossible for the vainest coxcomb to have mistaken
it for coquetry, or a desire of captivating a prize so valuable as
his affection. Darsie, with no more than the reasonable share of
self-opinion common to most youths when they approach twenty-one, knew
not how to explain her conduct.

Sometimes he was tempted to think that his own merits had, even during
the short intervals when they had seen each other, secured such a hold
of the affections of a young person who had probably been bred up in
ignorance of the world and its forms that she was unable to conceal
her partiality. Sometimes he suspected that she acted by her guardian’s
order, who, aware that he, Darsie, was entitled to a considerable
fortune, might have taken this bold stroke to bring about a marriage
betwixt him and so near a relative.

But neither of these suppositions was applicable to the character of the
parties. Miss Lilias’s manners, however soft and natural, displayed in
their ease and versatility considerable acquaintance with the habits
of the world, and in the few words she said during the morning repast,
there were mingled a shrewdness and good sense, which could scarce
belong to a miss capable of playing the silly part of a love-smitten
maiden so broadly. As for Redgauntlet, with his stately bearing, his
fatal frown, his eye of threat and of command, it was impossible, Darsie
thought, to suspect him of a scheme having private advantage for its
object; he could as soon have imagined Cassius picking Caesar’s pocket,
instead of drawing his poniard on the dictator.

While he thus mused, unable either to eat, drink, or answer to the
courtesy of Lilias, she soon ceased to speak to him, and sat silent as
himself.

They had remained nearly an hour in their halting-place, when
Redgauntlet said aloud, ‘Look out, Cristal Nixon. If we hear nothing
from Fairladies, we must continue our journey.’

Cristal went to the door, and presently returned and said to his master,
in a voice as harsh as his features, ‘Gilbert Gregson is coming, his
horse as white with foam as if a fiend had ridden him.’

Redgauntlet threw from him the plate on which he had been eating, and
hastened towards the door of the barn, which the courier at that moment
entered; a smart jockey with a black velvet hunting-cap, and a broad
belt drawn tight round his waist, to which was secured his express-bag.
The variety of mud with which he was splashed from cap to spur showed
he had had a rough and rapid ride. He delivered a letter to Mr.
Redgauntlet, with an obeisance, and then retired to the end of the barn,
where the other attendants were sitting or lying upon the straw, in
order to get some refreshment.

Redgauntlet broke the letter open with haste, and read it with anxious
and discomposed looks. On a second perusal, his displeasure seemed to
increase, his brow darkened, and was distinctly marked with the fatal
sign peculiar to his family and house. Darsie had never before observed
his frown bear such a close resemblance to the shape which tradition
assigned it.

Redgauntlet held out the open letter with one hand, and struck it with
the forefinger of the other, as, in a suppressed and displeased tone,
he said to Cristal Nixon, ‘Countermanded--ordered northward once
more! ‘Northward, when all our hopes lie to the south--a second Derby
direction, when we turned our back on glory, and marched in quest of
ruin!’

Cristal Nixon took the letter and ran it over, then returned it to his
master with the cold observation, ‘A female influence predominates.’

‘But it shall predominate no longer,’ said Redgauntlet; ‘it shall wane
as ours rises in the horizon. Meanwhile, I will on before--and you,
Cristal, will bring the party to the place assigned in the letter.
You may now permit the young persons to have unreserved communication
together; only mark that you watch the young man closely enough to
prevent his escape, if he should be idiot enough to attempt it, but not
approaching so close as to watch their free conversation.’

‘I care naught about their conversation,’ said Nixon, surlily.

‘You hear my commands, Lilias,’ said the laird, turning to the young
lady. ‘You may use my permission and authority to explain so much of our
family matters as you yourself know. At our next meeting I will complete
the task of disclosure, and I trust I shall restore one Redgauntlet more
to the bosom of our ancient family. Let Latimer, as he calls himself,
have a horse to himself; he must for some time retain his disguise.--My
horse--my horse!’

In two minutes they heard him ride off from the door of the barn,
followed at speed by two of the armed men of his party.

The commands of Cristal Nixon, in the meanwhile, put all the remainder
of the party in motion, but the laird himself was long out of sight ere
they were in readiness to resume their journey. When at length they set
out, Darsie was accommodated with a horse and side-saddle, instead of
being obliged to resume his place on the pillion behind the detestable
Nixon. He was obliged, however, to retain his riding-skirt, and to
reassume his mask. Yet, notwithstanding this disagreeable circumstance,
and although he observed that they gave him the heaviest and slowest
horse of the party, and that, as a further precaution against escape, he
was closely watched on every side, yet riding in company with the pretty
Lilias was an advantage which overbalanced these inconveniences.

It is true that this society, to which that very morning he would
have looked forward as a glimpse of heaven, had, now that it was
thus unexpectedly indulged, something much less rapturous than he had
expected.

It was in vain that, in order to avail himself of a situation so
favourable for indulging his romantic disposition, he endeavoured to
coax back, if I may so express myself, that delightful dream of ardent
and tender passion; he felt only such a confusion of ideas at the
difference between the being whom he had imagined, and her with whom he
was now in contact, that it seemed to him like the effect of witchcraft.
What most surprised him was, that this sudden flame should have died
away so rapidly, notwithstanding that the maiden’s personal beauty was
even greater than he had expected--her demeanour, unless it should be
deemed over kind towards himself, as graceful and becoming as he could
have fancied if, even in his gayest dreams. It were judging hardly
of him to suppose that the mere belief of his having attracted
her affections more easily than he expected was the cause of his
ungratefully undervaluing a prize too lightly won, or that his transient
passion played around his heart with the hitting radiance of a wintry
sunbeam flashing against an icicle, which may brighten it for a moment,
but cannot melt it. Neither of these was precisely the ease, though such
fickleness of disposition might also have some influence in the change.

The truth is, perhaps, the lover’s pleasure, like that of the hunter, is
in the chase; and that the brightest beauty loses half its merit, as
the fairest flower its perfume, when the willing hand can reach it
too easily. There must be doubt--there must be danger--there must be
difficulty; and if, as the poet says, the course of ardent affection
never does run smooth, it is perhaps because, without some intervening
obstacle, that which is called the romantic passion of love, in its high
poetical character and colouring can hardly have an existence--any more
than there can be a current in a river without the stream being narrowed
by steep banks, or checked by opposing rocks.

Let not those, however, who enter into a union for life without those
embarrassments which delight a Darsie Latimer, or a Lydia Languish, and
which are perhaps necessary to excite an enthusiastic passion in breasts
more firm than theirs, augur worse of their future happiness because
their own alliance is formed under calmer auspices. Mutual esteem, an
intimate knowledge of each other’s character, seen, as in their case,
undisguised by the mists of too partial passion--a suitable proportion
of parties in rank and fortune, in taste and pursuits--are more
frequently found in a marriage of reason, than in a union of romantic
attachment; where the imagination, which probably created the virtues
and accomplishments with which it invested the beloved object, is
frequently afterwards employed in magnifying the mortifying consequences
of its own delusion, and exasperating all the stings of disappointment.
Those who follow the banners of Reason are like the well-disciplined
battalion, which, wearing a more sober uniform and making a less
dazzling show than the light troops commanded by imagination, enjoy more
safety, and even more honour, in the conflicts of human life. All this,
however, is foreign to our present purpose.

Uncertain in what manner to address her whom he had been lately so
anxious to meet with, and embarrassed by a TETE-A-TETE to which his own
timid inexperience, gave some awkwardness, the party had proceeded more
than a hundred yards before Darsie assumed courage to accost, or even
to look at, his companion. Sensible, however, of the impropriety of his
silence, he turned to speak to her; and observing that, although she
wore her mask, there was something like disappointment and dejection
in her manner, he was moved by self-reproach for his own coldness, and
hastened to address her in the kindest tone he could assume.

‘You must think me cruelly deficient in gratitude, Miss Lilias, that
I have been thus long in your company, without thanking you for the
interest which you have deigned to take in my unfortunate affairs?’

‘I am glad you have at length spoken,’ she said, ‘though I owe it is
more coldly than I expected. MISS Lilias! DEIGN to take interest! In
whom, dear Darsie, CAN I take interest but in you; and why do you put
this barrier of ceremony betwixt us, whom adverse circumstances have
already separated for such a length of time?’

Darsie was again confounded at the extra candour, if we may use the
term, of this frank avowal. ‘One must love partridge very well,’ thought
he, ‘to accept it when thrown in one’s face--if this is not plain
speaking, there is no such place as downright Dunstable in being!’

Embarrassed with these reflections, and himself of a nature fancifully,
almost fastidiously, delicate, he could only in reply stammer forth an
acknowledgement of his companion’s goodness, and his own gratitude. She
answered in a tone partly sorrowful and partly impatient, repeating,
with displeased emphasis, the only distinct words he had been able
to bring forth--‘Goodness--gratitude!--O Darsie! should these be the
phrases between you and me? Alas! I am too sure you are displeased with
me, though I cannot even guess on what account. Perhaps you think I
have been too free in venturing upon my visit to your friend. But then
remember, it was in your behalf, and that I knew no better way to put
you on your guard against the misfortunes and restraint which you have
been subjected to, and are still enduring.’

‘Dear Lady’--said Darsie, rallying his recollection, and suspicious
of some error in apprehension,--a suspicion which his mode of address
seemed at once to communicate to Lilias, for she interrupted him,--

‘LADY! dear LADY! For whom, or for what, in Heaven’s name, do you take
me, that you address me so formally?’

Had the question been asked in that enchanted hall in fairyland, where
all interrogations must be answered with absolute sincerity, Darsie
had certainly replied, that he took her for the most frank-hearted and
ultra-liberal lass that had ever lived since Mother Eve eat the pippin
without paring. But as he was still on middle-earth, and free to avail
himself of a little polite deceit, he barely answered that he believed
he had the honour of speaking to the niece of Mr. Redgauntlet.

‘Surely,’ she replied; ‘but were it not as easy for you to have said, to
your own only sister?’

Darsie started in his saddle, as if he had received a pistol-shot.

‘My sister!’ he exclaimed.

‘And you did NOT know it, then?’ said she. ‘I thought your reception of
me was cold and indifferent!’

A kind and cordial embrace took place betwixt the relatives; and so
light was Darsie’s spirit, that he really felt himself more relieved, by
getting quit of the embarrassments of the last half-hour, during which
he conceived himself in danger of being persecuted by the attachment of
a forward girl, than disappointed by the vanishing of so many day-dreams
as he had been in the habit of encouraging during the time when the
green-mantled maiden was goddess of his idolatry. He had been already
flung from his romantic Pegasus, and was too happy at length to find
himself with bones unbroken, though with his back on the ground. He was,
besides, with all his whims and follies, a generous, kind-hearted youth,
and was delighted to acknowledge so beautiful and amiable a relative,
and to assure her in the warmest terms of his immediate affection and
future protection, so soon as they should be extricated from their
present situation. Smiles and tears mingled on Lilias’s cheeks, like
showers and sunshine in April weather.

‘Out on me,’ she said, ‘that I should be so childish as to cry at what
makes me so sincerely happy! since, God knows, family-love is what my
heart has most longed after, and to which it has been most a stranger.
My uncle says that you and I, Darsie, are but half Redgauntlets, and
that the metal of which our father’s family was made, has been softened
to effeminacy in our mother’s offspring.’

‘Alas!’ said Darsie, ‘I know so little of our family story, that I
almost doubted that I belonged to the House of Redgauntlet, although the
chief of the family himself intimated so much to me.’

‘The chief of the family!’ said Lilias. ‘You must know little of
your own descent indeed, if you mean my uncle by that expression. You
yourself, my dear Darsie, are the heir and representative of our ancient
House, for our father was the elder brother--that brave and unhappy Sir
Henry Darsie Redgauntlet, who suffered at Carlisle in the year 1746. He
took the name of Darsie, in conjunction with his own, from our mother,
heiress to a Cumberland family of great wealth and antiquity, of whose
large estates you are the undeniable heir, although those of your father
have been involved in the general doom of forfeiture. But all this must
be necessarily unknown to you.’

‘Indeed I hear it for the first time in my life,’ answered Darsie.

‘And you knew not that I was your sister?’ said Lilias. ‘No wonder you
received me so coldly. What a strange, wild, forward young person you
must have thought me--mixing myself in the fortunes of a stranger whom
I had only once spoken to--corresponding with him by signs--Good Heaven!
what can you have supposed me?’

‘And how should I have come to the knowledge of our connexion?’ said
Darsie. ‘You are aware I was not acquainted with it when we danced
together at Brokenburn.’

‘I saw that with concern, and fain I would have warned you,’ answered
Lilias; ‘but I was closely watched, and before I could find or make an
opportunity of coming to a full explanation with you on a subject so
agitating, I was forced to leave the room. What I did say was, you may
remember, a caution to leave the southern border, for I foresaw what
has since happened. But since my uncle has had you in his power, I never
doubted he had communicated to you our whole family history.’

‘He has left me to learn it from you, Lilias; and assure yourself that I
will hear it with more pleasure from your lips than from his. I have no
reason to be pleased with his conduct towards me.’

‘Of that,’ said Lilias, ‘you will judge better when you have heard what
I have to tell you;’ and she began her communication in the following
manner.





NARRATIVE OF DARSIE LATIMER, CONTINUED

‘The House of Redgauntlet,’ said the young lady, ‘has for centuries been
supposed to lie under a doom, which has rendered vain their courage,
their talents, their ambition, and their wisdom. Often making a figure
in history, they have been ever in the situation of men striving against
both wind and tide, who distinguish themselves by their desperate
exertions of strength, and their persevering endurance of toil, but
without being able to advance themselves upon their course by either
vigour or resolution. They pretend to trace this fatality to a legendary
history, which I may tell you at a less busy moment.’

Darsie intimated that he had already heard the tragic story of Sir
Alberick Redgauntlet.

‘I need only say, then,’ proceeded Lilias, ‘that our father and uncle
felt the family doom in its full extent. They were both possessed of
considerable property, which was largely increased by our father’s
marriage, and were both devoted to the service of the unhappy House
of Stuart; but (as our mother at least supposed) family considerations
might have withheld her husband from joining openly in the affair of
1745, had not the high influence which the younger brother possessed
over the elder, from his more decided energy of character, hurried him
along with himself into that undertaking.

‘When, therefore, the enterprise came to the fatal conclusion which
bereaved our father of his life and consigned his brother to exile, Lady
Redgauntlet fled from the north of England, determined to break off all
communication with her late husband’s family, particularly his brother,
whom she regarded as having, by their insane political enthusiasm, been
the means of his untimely death; and determined that you, my brother, an
infant, and that I, to whom she had just given birth, should be brought
up as adherents of the present dynasty. Perhaps she was too hasty in
this determination--too timidly anxious to exclude, if possible, from
the knowledge of the very spot where we existed, a relation so nearly
connected with us as our father’s only brother. But you must make
allowance for what she had suffered. See, brother,’ she said, pulling
her glove off, ‘these five blood-specks on my arm are a mark by which
mysterious Nature has impressed, on an unborn infant, a record of its
father’s violent death and its mother’s miseries.’ [Several persons
have brought down to these days the impressions which Nature had thus
recorded, when they were yet babes unborn. One lady of quality, whose
father was long under sentence of death previous to the Rebellion, was
marked on the back of the neck by the sign of a broad axe. Another whose
kinsmen had been slain in battle and died on the scaffold to the number
of seven, bore a child spattered on the right shoulder and down the
arm with scarlet drops, as if of blood. Many other instances might be
quoted.]

‘You were not, then, born when my father suffered?’ said Darsie.

‘Alas, no!’ she replied; ‘nor were you a twelvemonth old. It was no
wonder that my mother, after going through such scenes of agony,
became irresistibly anxious for the sake of her children--of her son in
particular; the more especially as the late Sir Henry, her husband, had,
by a settlement of his affairs, confided the custody of the persons
of her children, as well as the estates which descended to them,
independently of those which fell under his forfeiture, to his brother
Hugh, in whom he placed unlimited confidence.’

‘But my mother had no reason to fear the operation of such a deed,
conceived in favour of an attainted man,’ said Darsie.

‘True,’ replied Lilias; ‘but our uncle’s attainder might have been
reversed, like that of so many other persons, and our mother, who both
feared and hated him, lived in continual terror that this would be the
case, and that she should see the author, as she thought him, of her
husband’s death come armed with legal powers, and in a capacity to
use them for the purpose of tearing her children from her protection.
Besides, she feared, even in his incapacitated condition, the
adventurous and pertinacious spirit of her brother-in-law, Hugh
Redgauntlet, and felt assured that he would make some attempt to possess
himself of the persons of the children. On the other hand, our uncle,
whose proud disposition might, perhaps, have been soothed by the offer
of her confidence, revolted against the distrustful and suspicious
manner in which Lady Darsie Redgauntlet acted towards him. She basely
abused, he said, the unhappy circumstances in which he was placed,
in order to deprive him of his natural privilege of protecting and
educating the infants, whom nature and law, and the will of their
father, had committed to his charge, and he swore solemnly he would
not submit to such an injury. Report of his threats was made to Lady
Redgauntlet, and tended to increase those fears which proved but too
well founded. While you and I, children at that time of two or three
years old, were playing together in a walled orchard, adjacent to our
mother’s residence which she had fixed somewhere in Devonshire, my uncle
suddenly scaled the wall with several men, and I was snatched up; and
carried off to a boat which waited for them. My mother, however, flew to
your rescue, and as she seized on and held you fast, my uncle could not,
as he has since told me, possess himself of your person, without using
unmanly violence to his brother’s widow. Of this he was incapable; and,
as people began to assemble upon my mother’s screaming, he withdrew,
after darting upon you and her one of those fearful looks, which, it is
said, remain with our family, as a fatal bequest of Sir Alberick, our
ancestor.’

‘I have some recollection of the scuffle which you mention,’ said
Darsie; ‘and I think it was my uncle himself (since my uncle he is)
who recalled the circumstance to my mind on a late occasion. I can now
account for the guarded seclusion under which my poor mother lived--for
her frequent tears, her starts of hysterical alarm, and her constant and
deep melancholy. Poor lady! what a lot was hers, and what must have been
her feelings when it approached to a close!’

‘It was then that she adopted,’ said Lilias, ‘every precaution her
ingenuity could suggest, to keep your very existence concealed from the
person whom she feared--nay, from yourself; for she dreaded, as she
is said often to have expressed herself, that the wildfire blood of
Redgauntlet would urge you to unite your fortunes to those of your
uncle, who was well known still to carry on political intrigues, which
most other persons had considered as desperate. It was also possible
that he, as well as others, might get his pardon, as government showed
every year more lenity towards the remnant of the Jacobites, and then he
might claim the custody of your person, as your legal guardian. Either
of these events she considered as the direct road to your destruction.’

‘I wonder she had not claimed the protection of Chancery for me,’ said
Darsie; ‘or confided me to the care of some powerful friend.’

‘She was on indifferent terms with her relations, on account of her
marriage with our father,’ said Lilias, ‘and trusted more to secreting
you from your uncle’s attempts, than to any protection which law
might afford against them. Perhaps she judged unwisely, but surely not
unnaturally, for one rendered irritable by so many misfortunes and so
many alarms. Samuel Griffiths, an eminent banker, and a worthy clergyman
now dead were, I believe, the only persons whom she intrusted with the
execution of her last will; and my uncle believes that she made them
both swear to observe profound secrecy concerning your birth and
pretensions, until you should come to the age of majority, and, in the
meantime, to breed you up in the most private way possible, and that
which was most likely to withdraw you from my uncle’s observation.’

‘And I have no doubt,’ said Darsie, ‘that betwixt change of name
and habitation, they might have succeeded perfectly, but for the
accident--lucky or unlucky, I know not which to term it--which brought
me to Brokenburn, and into contact with Mr. Redgauntlet. I see also why
I was warned against England, for in England’--

‘In England alone, if I understand rightly,’ said Miss Redgauntlet,
‘the claims of your uncle to the custody of your person could have
been enforced, in case of his being replaced in the ordinary rights of
citizenship, either by the lenity of the government or by some change
in it. In Scotland, where you possess no property, I understand his
authority might; have been resisted, and measures taken to put you under
the protection of the law. But, pray, think it not unlucky that you
have taken the step of visiting Brokenburn--I feel confident that the
consequences must be ultimately fortunate, for have they not already
brought us into contact with each other?’

So saying, she held out her hand to her brother, who grasped it with a
fondness of pressure very different from the manner in which they first
clasped hands that morning. There was a moment’s pause, while the hearts
of both were overflowing with a feeling of natural affection, to which
circumstances had hitherto rendered them strangers.

At length Darsie broke silence; ‘I am ashamed,’ he said, ‘my dearest
Lilias, that I have suffered you to talk so long about matters
concerning myself only, while I remain ignorant of your story, and your
present situation.’

‘The former is none of the most interesting, nor the latter the most
safe or agreeable,’ answered Lilias; ‘but now, my dearest brother, I
shall have the inestimable support of your countenance and affection;
and were I but sure that we could weather the formidable crisis which
I find so close at hand, I should have little apprehensions for the
future.’

‘Let me know,’ said Darsie, ‘what our present situation is; and rely
upon my utmost exertions both in your defence and my own. For what
reason can my uncle desire to detain me a prisoner? If in mere
opposition to the will of my mother, she has long been no more; and I
see not why he should wish, at so much trouble and risk, to interfere
with the free will of one, to whom a few months will give a privilege
of acting for himself, with which he will have no longer any pretence to
interfere.’

‘My dearest Arthur,’ answered Lilias--‘for that name, as well as
Darsie, properly belongs to you--it is the leading feature in my uncle’s
character, that he has applied every energy of his powerful mind to the
service of the exiled family of Stuart. The death of his brother, the
dilapidation of his own fortunes, have only added to his hereditary zeal
for the House of Stuart a deep and almost personal hatred against the
present reigning family. He is, in short, a political enthusiast of
the most dangerous character, and proceeds in his agency with as much
confidence, as if he felt himself the very Atlas who is alone capable of
supporting a sinking cause.’

‘And where or how did you, my Lilias, educated, doubtless, under his
auspices, learn to have a different view of such subjects?’

‘By a singular chance,’ replied Lilias, ‘in the nunnery where my uncle
placed me. Although the abbess was a person exactly after his own heart,
my education as a pensioner devolved much on an excellent old mother who
had adopted the tenets of the Jansenists, with perhaps a still further
tendency towards the reformed doctrines, than those of Port Royal. The
mysterious secrecy with which she inculcated these tenets, gave them
charms to my young mind, and I embraced them the rather that they were
in direct opposition to the doctrines of the abbess, whom I hated so
much for her severity, that I felt a childish delight in setting her
control at defiance, and contradicting in my secret soul all that I was
openly obliged to listen to with reverence. Freedom of religious opinion
brings on, I suppose, freedom of political creed; for I had no sooner
renounced the Pope’s infallibility, than I began to question the
doctrine of hereditary and indefeasible right. In short, strange as it
may seem, I came out of a Parisian convent, not indeed an instructed
Whig and Protestant, but with as much inclination to be so as if I had
been bred up, like you, within the Presbyterian sound of Saint Giles’s
chimes.’

‘More so, perhaps,’ replied Darsie; ‘for the nearer the church--the
proverb is somewhat musty. But how did these liberal opinions of yours
agree with the very opposite prejudices of my uncle?’

‘They would have agreed like fire and water,’ answered Lilias, ‘had I
suffered mine to become visible; but as that would have subjected me to
constant reproach and upbraiding, or worse, I took great care to keep my
own secret; so that occasional censures for coldness, and lack of zeal
for the good cause, were the worst I had to undergo; and these were bad
enough.’

‘I applaud your caution,’ said Darsie.

‘You have reason,’ replied his sister; ‘but I got so terrible a specimen
of my uncle’s determination of character, before I had been acquainted
with him for much more than a week, that it taught me at what risk I
should contradict his humour. I will tell you the circumstances; for it
will better teach you to appreciate the romantic and resolved nature
of his character, than anything which I could state of his rashness and
enthusiasm.

‘After I had been many a long year at the convent, I was removed from
thence, and placed with a meagre old Scottish lady of high rank, the
daughter of an unfortunate person whose head had in the year 1715 been
placed on Temple Bar. She subsisted on a small pension from the French
Court, aided by an occasional gratuity from the Stuarts; to which the
annuity paid for my board formed a desirable addition. She was not
ill-tempered, nor very covetous--neither beat me nor starved me--but she
was so completely trammelled by rank and prejudices, so awfully profound
in genealogy, and so bitterly keen, poor lady, in British, politics,
that I sometimes thought it pity that the Hanoverians, who murdered, as
she used to tell me, her poor dear father, had left his dear daughter in
the land of the living. Delighted, therefore, was I, when my uncle made
his appearance, and abruptly announced his purpose of conveying me
to England. My extravagant joy at the idea of leaving Lady Rachel
Rougedragon was somewhat qualified by observing the melancholy look,
lofty demeanour, and commanding tone of my near relative. He held more
communication with me on the journey, however, than consisted with his
taciturn demeanour in general, and seemed anxious to ascertain my tone
of character, and particularly in point of courage. Now, though I am
a tamed Redgauntlet, yet I have still so much of our family spirit as
enables me to be as composed in danger as most of my sex; and upon two
occasions in the course of our journey--a threatened attack by banditti,
and the overturn of our carriage--I had the fortune so to conduct
myself, as to convey to my uncle a very favourable idea of my
intrepidity. Probably this encouraged him to put in execution the
singular scheme which he had in agitation.

‘Ere we reached London we changed our means of conveyance, and altered
the route by which we approached the city, more than once; then, like a
hare which doubles repeatedly at some distance from the seat she means
to occupy, and at last leaps into her form from a distance so great as
she can clear by a spring, we made a forced march, and landed in private
and obscure lodgings in a little old street in Westminster, not far from
the Cloisters.

‘On the morning of the day on which we arrived my uncle went abroad, and
did not return for some hours. Meantime I had no other amusement than to
listen to the tumult of noises which succeeded each other, or reigned
in confusion together during the whole morning. Paris I had thought
the most noisy capital in the world, but Paris seemed midnight silence
compared to London. Cannon thundered near and at a distance--drums,
trumpets, and military music of every kind, rolled, flourished, and
pierced the clouds, almost without intermission. To fill up the concert,
bells pealed incessantly from a hundred steeples. The acclamations of
an immense multitude were heard from time to time, like the roaring of a
mighty ocean, and all this without my being able to glean the least idea
of what was going on, for the windows of our apartment looked upon
a waste backyard, which seemed totally deserted. My curiosity became
extreme, for I was satisfied, at length, that it must be some festival
of the highest order which called forth these incessant sounds.

‘My uncle at length returned, and with him a man of an exterior
singularly unprepossessing. I need not describe him to you, for--do not
look round--he rides behind us at this moment.’

‘That respectable person, Mr. Cristal Nixon, I suppose?’ said Darsie.

‘The same,’ answered Lilias; ‘make no gesture, that may intimate we are
speaking of him.’

Darsie signified that he understood her, and she pursued her relation.

‘They were both in full dress, and my uncle, taking a bundle from Nixon,
said to me, “Lilias, I am come to carry you to see a grand ceremony--put
on as hastily as you can the dress you will find in that parcel, and
prepare to attend me.” I found a female dress, splendid and elegant,
but somewhat bordering upon the antique fashion. It might be that of
England, I thought, and I went to my apartment full of curiosity, and
dressed myself with all speed.

‘My uncle surveyed me with attention--“She may pass for one of the
flower-girls,” he said to Nixon, who only answered with a nod.

‘We left the house together, and such was their knowledge of the lanes,
courts, and bypaths, that though there was the roar of a multitude in
the broad streets, those which we traversed were silent and deserted;
and the strollers whom we met, tired of gazing upon gayer figures,
scarcely honoured us with a passing look, although, at any other time,
we should, among these vulgar suburbs, have attracted a troublesome
share of observation. We crossed at length a broad street, where many
soldiers were on guard, while others, exhausted with previous duty, were
eating, drinking, smoking, and sleeping beside their piled arms.

‘“One day, Nixon,” whispered my uncle, “we will make these redcoated
gentry stand to their muskets more watchfully.”

‘“Or it will be the worse for them,” answered his attendant, in a voice
as unpleasant as his physiognomy.

‘Unquestioned and unchallenged by any one, we crossed among the guards;
and Nixon tapped thrice at a small postern door in a huge ancient
building, which was straight before us. It opened, and we entered
without my perceiving by whom we were admitted. A few dark and narrow
passages at length conveyed us into an immense Gothic hall, the
magnificence of which baffles my powers of description.

‘It was illuminated by ten thousand wax lights, whose splendour at first
dazzled my eyes, coming as we did from these dark and secret avenues.
But when my sight began to become steady, how shall I describe what
I beheld? Beneath were huge ranges of tables, occupied by princes and
nobles in their robes of state--high officers of the crown, wearing
their dresses and badges of authority--reverend prelates and judges, the
sages of the church and law, in their more sombre, yet not less awful
robes--with others whose antique and striking costume announced their
importance, though I could not even guess who they might be. But at
length the truth burst on me at once--it was, and the murmurs around
confirmed it, the Coronation Feast. At a table above the rest, and
extending across the upper end of the hall, sat enthroned the youthful
sovereign himself, surrounded by the princes of the blood, and other
dignitaries, and receiving the suit and homage of his subjects. Heralds
and pursuivants, blazing in their fantastic yet splendid armorial
habits, and pages of honour, gorgeously arrayed in the garb of other
days, waited upon the princely banqueters. In the galleries with which
this spacious hall was surrounded, shone all, and more than all, that
my poor imagination could conceive, of what was brilliant in riches, or
captivating in beauty. Countless rows of ladies, whose diamonds, jewels,
and splendid attire were their least powerful charms, looked down from
their lofty seats on the rich scene beneath, themselves forming a show
as dazzling and as beautiful as that of which they were spectators.
Under these galleries, and behind the banqueting tables, were a
multitude of gentlemen, dressed as if to attend a court, but whose garb,
although rich enough to have adorned a royal drawing room, could not
distinguish them in such a high scene as this. Amongst these we wandered
for a few minutes, undistinguished and unregarded. I saw several
young persons dressed as I was, so was under no embarrassment from the
singularity of my habit, and only rejoiced, as I hung on my uncle’s
arm, at the magical splendour of such a scene, and at his goodness for
procuring me the pleasure of beholding it.

‘By and by, I perceived that my uncle had acquaintances among those
who were under the galleries, and seemed, like ourselves, to be mere
spectators of the solemnity. They recognized each other with a single
word, sometimes only with a grip of the hand-exchanged some private
signs, doubtless--and gradually formed a little group, in the centre of
which we were placed.

‘“Is it not a grand sight, Lilias?” said my uncle. “All the noble, and
all the wise, and all the wealthy of Britain, are there assembled.”

‘“It is indeed,” said I, “all that my mind could have fancied of regal
power and splendour.”

‘“Girl,” he whispered,--and my uncle can make his whispers as terribly
emphatic as his thundering voice or his blighting look--“all that is
noble and worthy in this fair land are there assembled--but it is to
bend like slaves and sycophants before the throne of a new usurper.”

‘I looked at him, and the dark hereditary frown of our unhappy ancestor
was black upon his brow.

‘“For God’s sake,” I whispered, “consider where we are.”

‘“Fear nothing,” he said; “we are surrounded by friends.” As he
proceeded, his strong and muscular frame shook with suppressed
agitation. “See,” he said, “yonder bends Norfolk, renegade to his
Catholic.faith; there stoops the Bishop of ----, traitor to the Church
of England; and,--shame of shames! yonder the gigantic form of Errol
bows his head before the grandson of his father’s murderer! But a sign
shall be seen this night amongst them--MENE, MENE, TEKEL, UPHARSIN,
shall be read on these walls, as distinctly as the spectral handwriting
made them visible on those of Belshazzar!”

‘“For God’s sake,” said I, dreadfully alarmed, “it is impossible you can
meditate violence in such a presence!”

‘“None is intended, fool,” he answered, “nor can the slightest mischance
happen, provided you will rally your boasted courage, and obey my
directions. But do it coolly and quickly, for there are a hundred lives
at stake.”

‘“Alas! what--can I do?” I asked in the utmost terror.

‘“Only be prompt to execute my bidding,” said he; “it is but to lift a
glove--Here, hold this in your hand--throw the train of your dress over
it, be firm, composed, and ready--or, at all events, I step forward
myself.”

‘“If there is no violence designed,” I said, taking, mechanically, the
iron glove he put into my hand.

‘“I could not conceive his meaning; but, in the excited state of mind in
which I beheld him, I was convinced that disobedience on my part would
lead to some wild explosion. I felt, from the emergency of the occasion,
a sudden presence of mind, and resolved to do anything that might avert
violence and bloodshed. I was not long held in suspense. A loud flourish
of trumpets and the voice of heralds were mixed with the clatter of
horses’ hoofs, while a champion, armed at all points like those I had
read of in romances, attended by squires, pages, and the whole
retinue of chivalry, pranced forward, mounted upon a barbed steed. His
challenge, in defiance of all who dared impeach the title of the new
sovereign, was recited aloud--once, and again.”

‘“Rush in at the third sounding,” said my uncle to me; “bring me the
parader’s gage, and leave mine in lieu of it.”

‘I could not see how this was to be done, as we were surrounded by
people on all sides. But, at the third sounding of the trumpets, a lane
opened as if by word of command, betwixt me and the champion, and my
uncle’s voice said, “Now, Lilias, NOW!”

‘With a swift and yet steady step, and with a presence of mind for
which I have never since been able to account, I discharged the perilous
commission. I was hardly seen, I believe, as I exchanged the pledges of
battle, and in an instant retired. “Nobly done, my girl!” said my
uncle, at whose side I found myself, shrouded as I was before, by the
interposition of the bystanders. “Cover our retreat, gentlemen,” he
whispered to those around him.

‘Room was made for us to approach the wall, which seemed to open, and we
were again involved in the dark passages through which we had formerly
passed. In a small anteroom, my uncle stopped, and hastily muffling me
in a mantle which was lying there, we passed the guards--threaded the
labyrinth of empty streets and courts, and reached our retired lodgings
without attracting the least attention.’

‘I have often heard,’ said Darsie, ‘that a female, supposed to be a
man in disguise,--and yet, Lilias, you do not look very masculine,--had
taken up the champion’s gauntlet at the present king’s coronation, and
left in its place a gage of battle, with a paper, offering to accept the
combat, provided a fair field should be allowed for it. I have hitherto
considered it as an idle tale. I little thought how nearly I was
interested in the actors of a scene so daring. How could you have
courage to go through with it?’ [See Note 9.]

‘Had I had leisure for reflection,’ answered his sister, ‘I should have
refused, from a mixture of principle and of fear. But, like many people
who do daring actions, I went on because I had not time to think of
retreating. The matter was little known, and it is said the king had
commanded that it should not be further inquired into;--from prudence,
as I suppose, and lenity, though my uncle chooses to ascribe the
forbearance of the Elector of Hanover, as he calls him, sometimes to
pusillanimity, and sometimes to a presumptuous scorn of the faction who
opposes his title.’

‘And have your subsequent agencies under this frantic enthusiast,’ said
Darsie, ‘equalled this in danger?’

‘No--nor in importance,’ replied Lilias; ‘though I have witnessed much
of the strange and desperate machinations, by which, in spite of every
obstacle, and in contempt of every danger, he endeavours to awaken the
courage of a broken party. I have traversed, in his company, all England
and Scotland, and have visited the most extraordinary and contrasted
scenes; now lodging at the castles of the proud gentry of Cheshire and
Wales, where the retired aristocrats, with opinions as antiquated as
their dwellings and their manners, still continue to nourish Jacobitical
principles; and the next week, perhaps, spent among outlawed smugglers,
or Highland banditti. I have known my uncle often act the part of a
hero, and sometimes that of a mere vulgar conspirator, and turn himself,
with the most surprising flexibility, into all sorts of shapes to
attract proselytes to his cause.’

‘Which, in the present day,’ said Darsie, ‘he finds, I presume, no easy
task.’

‘So difficult,’ said Lilias, ‘that, I believe, he has, at different
times, disgusted with the total falling away of some friends, and
the coldness of others, been almost on the point of resigning his
undertaking. How often I have I known him affect an open brow and a
jovial manner, joining in the games of the gentry, and even in the
sports of the common people, in order to invest himself with a temporary
degree of popularity; while, in fact, his heart was bursting to witness
what he called the degeneracy of the times, the decay of activity among
the aged, and the want of zeal in the rising generation. After the day
has been spent in the hardest exercise, he has spent the night in pacing
his solitary chamber, bewailing the downfall of the cause, and wishing
for the bullet of Dundee or the axe of Balmerino.’

‘A strange delusion,’ said Darsie; ‘and it is wonderful that it does not
yield to the force of reality.’

‘Ah, but,’ replied Lilias, ‘realities of late have seemed to flatter his
hopes. The general dissatisfaction with the peace--the unpopularity
of the minister, which has extended itself even to the person of his
master--the various uproars which have disturbed the peace of the
metropolis, and a general state of disgust and disaffection, which seems
to affect the body of the nation, have given unwonted encouragement to
the expiring hopes of the Jacobites, and induced many, both at the Court
of Rome, and, if it can be called so, of the Pretender, to lend a more
favourable ear than they had hitherto done to the insinuations of those
who, like my uncle, hope, when hope is lost to all but themselves.
Nay, I really believe that at this moment they meditate some desperate
effort. My uncle has been doing all in his power, of late, to conciliate
the affections of those wild communities that dwell on the Solway, over
whom our family possessed a seignorial interest before the forfeiture,
and amongst whom, on the occasion of 1745, our unhappy father’s
interest, with his own, raised a considerable body of men. But they are
no longer willing to obey his summons; and, as one apology among others,
they allege your absence as their natural head and leader. This has
increased his desire to obtain possession of your person, and, if he
possibly can, to influence your mind, so as to obtain your authority to
his proceedings.’

‘That he shall never obtain,’ answered Darsie; ‘my principles and
my prudence alike forbid such a step. Besides, it would be totally
unavailing to his purpose. Whatever these people may pretend, to evade
your uncle’s importunities, they cannot, at this time of day, think of
subjecting their necks again to the feudal yoke, which was effectually
broken by the act of 1748, abolishing vassalage and hereditary
jurisdictions.’

‘Aye, but that my uncle considers as the act of a usurping government,’
said Lilias.

‘Like enough he may think so,’ answered her brother, ‘for he is a
superior, and loses his authority by, the enactment. But the question
is, what the vassals will think of it who have gained their freedom
from feudal slavery, and have now enjoyed that freedom for many years?
However, to cut the matter short, if five hundred men would rise at the
wagging of my finger, that finger shall not be raised in a cause which I
disapprove of, and upon that my uncle may reckon.’

‘But you may temporize,’ said Lilias, upon whom the idea of her uncle’s
displeasure made evidently a strong impression,--‘you may temporize,
as most of the gentry in this country do, and let the bubble burst of
itself; for it is singular how few of them venture to oppose my uncle
directly. I entreat you to avoid direct collision with him. To hear
you, the head of the House of Redgauntlet, declare against the family
of Stuart, would either break his heart, or drive him to some act of
desperation.’

‘Yes, but, Lilias, you forget that the consequences of such an act of
complaisance might be, that the House of Redgauntlet and I might lose
both our heads at one blow.’

‘Alas!’ said she, ‘I had forgotten that danger. I have grown familiar
with perilous intrigues, as the nurses in a pest-house are said to
become accustomed to the air around them, till they forget even that it
is noisome.’

‘And yet,’ said Darsie, ‘if I could free myself from him without coming
to an open rupture. Tell me, Lilias, do you think it possible that he
can have any immediate attempt in view?’

‘To confess the truth,’ answered Lilias, ‘I cannot doubt that he has.
There has been an unusual bustle among the Jacobites of late. They have
hopes, as I told you, from circumstances unconnected with their own
strength. Just before you came to the country, my uncle’s desire to find
you out became, if possible, more eager than ever--he talked of men
to be presently brought together, and of your name and influence for
raising them. At this very time your first visit to Brokenburn took
place. A suspicion arose in my uncle’s mind, that you might be the
youth he sought, and it was strengthened by papers and letters which the
rascal Nixon did not hesitate to take from your pocket. Yet a mistake
might have occasioned a fatal explosion; and my uncle therefore posted
to Edinburgh to follow out the clue he had obtained, and fished enough
of information from old Mr. Fairford to make him certain that you were
the person he sought. Meanwhile, and at the expense of some personal
and perhaps too bold exertion, I endeavoured, through your friend young
Fairford, to put you on your guard.’

‘Without success,’ said Darsie, blushing under his mask when he
recollected how he had mistaken his sister’s meaning.

‘I do not wonder that my warning was fruitless,’ said she; ‘the thing
was doomed to be. Besides, your escape would have been difficult. You
were dogged the whole time you were at the Shepherd’s Bush and at Mount
Sharon, by a spy who scarcely ever left you.’

‘The wretch, little Benjie!’ exclaimed Darsie. ‘I will wring the
monkey’s neck round, the first time we meet.’

‘It was he indeed who gave constant information of your motions to
Cristal Nixon,’ said Lilias.

‘And Cristal Nixon--I owe him, too, a day’s work in harvest,’ said
Darsie; ‘for I am mistaken if he was not the person that struck me down
when I was made prisoner among the rioters.’

‘Like enough; for he has a head and hand for any villany. My uncle was
very angry about it; for though the riot was made to have an opportunity
of carrying you off in the confusion, as well as to put the fishermen
at variance with the public law, it would have been his last thought to
have injured a hair of your head. But Nixon has insinuated himself into
all my uncle’s secrets, and some of these are so dark and dangerous,
that though there are few things he would not dare, I doubt if he dare
quarrel with him. And yet I know that of Cristal would move my uncle to
pass his sword through his body.’

‘What is it, for Heaven’s sake?’, said Darsie. ‘I have a particular
desire for wishing to know.’

‘The old, brutal desperado, whose face and mind are a libel upon human
nature, has had the insolence to speak to his master’s niece as one whom
he was at liberty to admire; and when I turned on him with the anger and
contempt he merited, the wretch grumbled out something, as if he held
the destiny of our family in his hand.’

‘I thank you, Lilias,’ said Darsie, eagerly,--‘I thank you with all my
heart for this communication. I have blamed myself as a Christian man
for the indescribable longing I felt from the first moment I saw that
rascal, to send a bullet through his head; and now you have perfectly
accounted for and justified this very laudable wish. I wonder my uncle,
with the powerful sense you describe him to be possessed of, does not
see through such a villain.’

‘I believe he knows him to be capable of much evil,’ answered
Lilias--‘selfish, obdurate, brutal, and a man-hater. But then
he conceives him to possess the qualities most requisite for a
conspirator--undaunted courage, imperturbable coolness and address, and
inviolable fidelity. In the last particular he may be mistaken. I have
heard Nixon blamed for the manner in which our poor father was taken
after Culloden.’

‘Another reason for my innate aversion,’ said Darsie, but I will be on
my guard with him.’

‘See, he observes us closely,’ said Lilias. ‘What a thing is conscience!
He knows we are now speaking of him, though he cannot have heard a word
that we have said.’

It seemed as if she had guessed truly; for Cristal Nixon at that moment
rode up to them, and said, with an affectation of jocularity, which sat
very ill on his sullen features, ‘Come, young ladies, you have had time
enough for your chat this morning, and your tongues, I think, must
be tired. We are going to pass a village, and I must beg you to
separate--you, Miss Lilias, to ride a little behind--and you, Mrs.,
or Miss, or Master, whichever you choose to be called, to be jogging a
little before.’

Lilias checked her horse without speaking, but not until she had given
her brother an expressive look, recommending caution; to which he
replied by a signal indicating that he understood and would comply with
her request.





NARRATTVE OF DARSIE LATIMER, CONTINUED

Left to his solitary meditations, Darsie (for we will still term Sir
Arthur Darsie Redgauntlet of that Ilk by the name to which the reader
is habituated) was surprised not only at the alteration of his own state
and condition, but at the equanimity with which he felt himself disposed
to view all these vicissitudes.

His fever--fit of love had departed like a morning’s dream, and left
nothing behind but a painful sense of shame, and a resolution to be more
cautious ere he again indulged in such romantic visions. His station
in society was changed from that of a wandering, unowned youth, in whom
none appeared to take an interest excepting the strangers by whom he had
been educated, to the heir of a noble house, possessed of such influence
and such property, that it seemed as if the progress or arrest of
important political events were likely to depend upon his resolution.
Even this sudden elevation, the more than fulfilment of those wishes
which had haunted him ever since he was able to form a wish on the
subject, was contemplated by Darsie, volatile as his disposition was,
without more than a few thrills of gratified vanity.

It is true, there were circumstances in his present situation to
counterbalance such high advantages. To be a prisoner in the hands of a
man so determined as his uncle, was no agreeable consideration, when
he was calculating how he might best dispute his pleasure and refuse
to join him in the perilous enterprise which he seemed to meditate.
Outlawed and desperate himself, Darsie could not doubt that his uncle
was surrounded by men capable of anything--that he was restrained by
no personal considerations--and therefore what degree of compulsion he
might apply to his brother’s son, or in what manner he might feel at
liberty to punish his contumacy, should he disavow the Jacobite cause,
must depend entirely upon the limits of his own conscience; and who
was to answer for the conscience of a heated enthusiast who considers
opposition to the party he has espoused, as treason to the welfare of
his country? After a short interval, Cristal Nixon was pleased to throw
some light upon the subject which agitated him.

When that grim satellite rode up without ceremony close to Darsie’s
side, the latter felt his very flesh creep with abhorrence, so little
was he able to endure his presence, since the story of Lilias had added
to his instinctive hatred of the man.

His voice, too, sounded like that of a screech-owl, as he said, ‘So, my
young cock of the north, you now know it all, and no doubt are blessing
your uncle for stirring you up to such an honourable action.’

‘I will acquaint my uncle with my sentiments on the subject, before I
make them known to any one else,’ said Darsie, scarcely prevailing on
his tongue to utter even these few words in a civil manner.

‘Umph,’ murmured Cristal betwixt his teeth. ‘Close as wax, I see; and
perhaps not quite so pliable. But take care, my pretty youth,’ he added,
scornfully; ‘Hugh Redgauntlet will prove a rough colt-breaker--he will
neither spare whipcord nor spur-rowel, I promise you.’

‘I have already said, Mr. Nixon, answered Darsie, ‘that I will canvass
those matters of which my sister has informed me, with my uncle himself,
and with no other person.’

‘Nay, but a word of friendly advice would do you no harm, young master,’
replied Nixon. ‘Old Redgauntlet is apter at a blow than a word--likely
to bite before he barks--the true man for giving Scarborough warning,
first knock you down, then bid you stand. So, methinks, a little kind
warning as to consequences were not amiss, lest they come upon you
unawares.’

‘If the warning is really kind, Mr. Nixon,’ said the young man, ‘I
will hear it thankfully; and indeed, if otherwise, I must listen to it
whether I will or no, since I have at present no choice of company or of
conversation.’

‘Nay, I have but little to say,’ said Nixon, affecting to give to his
sullen and dogged manner the appearance of an honest bluntness; ‘I am
as little apt to throw away words as any one. But here is the
question--Will you join heart and hand with your uncle, or no?’

‘What if I should say Aye?’ said Darsie, determined, if possible, to
conceal his resolution from this man.

‘Why, then,’ said Nixon, somewhat surprised at the readiness of his
answer, ‘all will go smooth, of course--you will take share in this
noble undertaking, and, when it succeeds, you will exchange your open
helmet for an earl’s coronet perhaps.’

‘And how if it fails?’ said Darsie.

‘Thereafter as it may be,’ said Nixon; ‘they who play at bowls must meet
with rubbers.’

‘Well, but suppose, then, I have some foolish tenderness for my
windpipe, and that when my uncle proposes the adventure to me I should
say No--how then, Mr. Nixon?’

‘Why, then, I would have you look to yourself, young master. There are
sharp laws in France against refractory pupils--LETTRES DE CACHET
are easily come by when such men as we are concerned with interest
themselves in the matter.’

‘But we are not in France,’ said poor Darsie, through whose blood ran a
cold shivering at the idea of a French prison.

‘A fast-sailing lugger will soon bring you there though, snug stowed
under hatches, like a cask of moonlight.’

‘But the French are at peace with us,’ said Darsie, ‘and would not
dare’--

‘Why, who would ever hear of you?’ interrupted Nixon; ‘do you imagine
that a foreign court would call you up for judgement, and put the
sentence of imprisonment in the COURRIER DE L’EUROPE, as they do at the
Old Bailey? No, no, young gentleman--the gates of the Bastille, and of
Mont Saint Michel, and the Castle of Vincennes, move on d--d easy hinges
when they let folk in--not the least jar is heard. There are cool cells
there for hot heads--as calm, and quiet, and dark, as you could wish in
Bedlam--and the dismissal comes when the carpenter brings the prisoner’s
coffin, and not sooner.’

‘Well, Mr. Nixon,’ said Darsie, affecting a cheerfulness which he was
far from feeling, ‘mine is a hard case--a sort of hanging choice, you
will allow--since I must either offend our own government here and
run the risk of my life for doing so, or be doomed to the dungeons of
another country, whose laws I have never offended since I have never
trod its soil--Tell me what you would do if you were in my place.

‘I’ll tell you that when I am there,’ said Nixon, and, checking his
horse, fell back to the rear of the little party.

‘It is evident,’ thought the young man, ‘that the villain believes me
completely noosed, and perhaps has the ineffable impudence to suppose
that my sister must eventually succeed to the possessions which have
occasioned my loss of freedom, and that his own influence over the
destinies of our unhappy family may secure him possession of the
heiress; but he shall perish by my hand first!--I must now be on the
alert to make my escape, if possible, before I am forced on shipboard.
Blind Willie will not, I think, desert me without an effort on my
behalf, especially if he has learned that I am the son of his late
unhappy patron. What a change is mine! Whilst I possessed neither rank
nor fortune, I lived safely and unknown, under the protection of the
kind and respectable friends whose hearts Heaven had moved towards me.
Now that I am the head of an honourable house, and that enterprises of
the most daring character await my decision, and retainers and vassals
seem ready to rise at my beck, my safety consists chiefly in the
attachment of a blind stroller!’

While he was revolving these things in his mind, and preparing himself
for the interview with his uncle which could not but be a stormy one,
he saw Hugh Redgauntlet come riding slowly back to meet them without any
attendants. Cristal Nixon rode up as he approached, and, as they met,
fixed on him a look of inquiry.

‘The fool, Crackenthorp,’ said Redgauntlet, has let strangers into his
house. Some of his smuggling comrades, I believe; we must ride slowly to
give him time to send them packing.’

‘Did you see any of your friends?’ said Cristal.

‘Three, and have letters from many more. They are unanimous on the
subject you wot of--and the point must be conceded to them, or, far as
the matter has gone, it will go no further.’

‘You will hardly bring the father to stoop to his flock,’ said Cristal,
with a sneer.

‘He must and shall!’ answered Redgauntlet, briefly. ‘Go to the front,
Cristal--I would speak with my nephew. I trust, Sir Arthur Redgauntlet,
you are satisfied with the manner in which I have discharged my duty to
your sister?’

‘There can be no fault found to her manners or sentiments,’ answered
Darsie; ‘I am happy in knowing a relative so amiable.’

‘I am glad of it,’ answered Mr. Redgauntlet. ‘I am no nice judge of
women’s qualifications, and my life has been dedicated to one great
object; so that since she left France she has had but little opportunity
of improvement. I have subjected her, however, as little as possible to
the inconveniences and privations of my wandering and dangerous life.
From time to time she has resided for weeks and months with families of
honour and respectability, and I am glad that she has, in, your opinion,
the manners and behaviour which become her birth.’

Darsie expressed himself perfectly satisfied, and there was a little
pause, which Redgauntlet broke by solemnly addressing his nephew.

‘For you, my nephew, I also hoped to have done much. The weakness and
timidity of your mother sequestered you from my care, or it would have
been my pride and happiness to have trained up the son of my unhappy
brother in those paths of honour in which our ancestors have always
trod.’

‘Now comes the storm,’ thought Darsie to himself, and began to collect
his thoughts, as the cautious master of a vessel furls his sails and
makes his ship snug when he discerns the approaching squall.

‘My mother’s conduct in respect to me might be misjudged,’ he said, ‘but
it was founded on the most anxious affection.’

‘Assuredly,’ said his uncle, ‘and I have no wish to reflect on her
memory, though her mistrust has done so much injury, I will not say to
me, but to the cause of my unhappy country. Her scheme was, I think,
to have made you that wretched pettifogging being, which they still
continue to call in derision by the once respectable name of a Scottish
Advocate; one of those mongrel things that must creep to learn the
ultimate decision of his causes to the bar of a foreign court, instead
of pleading before the independent and august Parliament of his own
native kingdom.’

‘I did prosecute the study of law for a year or two, said Darsie, ‘but I
found I had neither taste nor talents for the science.’

‘And left it with scorn, doubtless,’ said Mr. Redgauntlet. ‘Well, I now
hold up to you, my dearest nephew, a more worthy object of ambition.
Look eastward--do you see a monument standing on yonder plain, near a
hamlet?’

Darsie replied that he did,

‘The hamlet is called Burgh-upon-Sands, and yonder monument is erected
to the memory of the tyrant Edward I. The just hand of Providence
overtook him on that spot, as he was leading his bands to complete the
subjugation of Scotland whose civil dissensions began under his accursed
policy. The glorious career of Bruce might have been stopped in its
outset; the field of Bannockburn might have remained a bloodless turf,
if God had not removed, in the very crisis, the crafty and bold tyrant
who had so long been Scotland’s scourge. Edward’s grave is the cradle of
our national freedom. It is within sight of that great landmark of our
liberty that I have to propose to you an undertaking, second in honour
and importance to none since the immortal Bruce stabbed the Red Comyn,
and grasped with his yet bloody hand the independent crown of Scotland.’

He paused for an answer; but Darsie, overawed by the energy of his
manner, and unwilling to commit himself by a hasty explanation, remained
silent.

‘I will not suppose,’ said Hugh Redgauntlet, after a pause, that you
are either so dull as not to comprehend the import of my words--or so
dastardly as to be dismayed by my proposal--or so utterly degenerate
from the blood and sentiments of your ancestors, as not to feel my
summons as the horse hears the war-trumpet.’

‘I will not pretend to misunderstand you, sir,’ said Darsie; ‘but an
enterprise directed against a dynasty now established for three reigns
requires strong arguments, both in point of justice and of expediency,
to recommend it to men of conscience and prudence.’

‘I will not,’ said Redgauntlet, while his eyes sparkled with anger,--‘I
will not hear you speak a word against the justice of that enterprise,
for which your oppressed country calls with the voice of a parent,
entreating her children for aid--or against that noble revenge which
your father’s blood demands from his dishonoured grave. His skull is
yet standing over the Rikargate, [The northern gate of Carlisle was long
garnished with the heads of the Scottish rebels executed in 1746.] and
even its bleak and mouldered jaws command you to be a man. I ask you,
in the name of God and of your country, will you draw your sword and
go with me to Carlisle, were it but to lay your father’s head, now the
perch of the obscene owl and carrion crow and the scoff of every ribald
clown, in consecrated earth as befits his long ancestry?’

Darsie, unprepared to answer an appeal urged with so much passion, and
not doubting a direct refusal would cost him his liberty or life, was
again silent.

‘I see,’ said his uncle, in a more composed tone, ‘that it is not
deficiency of spirit, but the grovelling habits of a confined education,
among the poor-spirited class you were condemned to herd with, that
keeps you silent. You scarce yet believe yourself a Redgauntlet; your
pulse has not yet learned the genuine throb that answers to the summons
of honour and of patriotism.’

‘I trust,’ replied Darsie, at last, ‘that I shall never be found
indifferent to the call of either; but to answer them with effect--even
were I convinced that they now sounded in my ear--I must see some
reasonable hope of success in the desperate enterprise in which you
would involve me. I look around me, and I see a settled government--an
established authority--a born Briton on the throne--the very Highland
mountaineers, upon whom alone the trust of the exiled family reposed,
assembled into regiments which act under the orders of the existing
dynasty. [The Highland regiments were first employed by the celebrated
Earl of Chatham, who assumed to himself no small degree of praise for
having called forth to the support of the country and the government,
the valour which had been too often directed against both.] France has
been utterly dismayed by the tremendous lessons of the last war, and
will hardly provoke another. All without and within the kingdom is
adverse to encountering a hopeless struggle, and you alone, sir, seem
willing to undertake a desperate enterprise.’

‘And would undertake it were it ten times more desperate; and have
agitated it when ten times the obstacles were interposed. Have I forgot
my brother’s blood? Can I--dare I even now repeat the Pater Noster,
since my enemies and the murderers remain unforgiven? Is there an art I
have not practised--a privation to which I have not submitted, to bring
on the crisis, which I now behold arrived? Have I not been a vowed and a
devoted man, forgoing every comfort of social life, renouncing even the
exercise of devotion unless when I might name in prayer my prince and
country, submitting to everything to make converts to this noble cause?
Have I done all this, and shall I now stop short?’ Darsie was about to
interrupt him, but he pressed his hand affectionately upon his shoulder,
and enjoining, or rather imploring, silence, ‘Peace,’ he said, ‘heir of
my ancestors’ fame--heir of all my hopes and wishes. Peace, son of my
slaughtered brother! I have sought for thee, and mourned for thee, as
a mother for an only child. Do not let me again lose you in the moment
when you are restored to my hopes. Believe me, I distrust so much my own
impatient temper, that I entreat you, as the dearest boon, do naught to
awaken it at this crisis.’

Darsie was not sorry to reply that his respect for the person of his
relation would induce him to listen to all which he had to apprise him
of, before he formed any definite resolution upon the weighty subjects
of deliberation which he proposed to him.

‘Deliberation!’ repeated Redgauntlet, impatiently; ‘and yet it is not
ill said. I wish there had been more warmth in thy reply, Arthur; but I
must recollect, were an eagle bred in a falcon’s mew and hooded like a
reclaimed hawk, he could not at first gaze steadily on the sun. Listen
to me, my dearest Arthur. The state of this nation no more implies
prosperity, than the florid colour of a feverish patient is a symptom
of health. All is false and hollow. The apparent success of Chatham’s
administration has plunged the country deeper in debt than all the
barren acres of Canada are worth, were they as fertile as Yorkshire--the
dazzling lustre of the victories of Minden and Quebec have been dimmed
by the disgrace of the hasty peace--by the war, England, at immense
expense, gained nothing but honour, and that she has gratuitously
resigned. Many eyes, formerly cold and indifferent, are now looking
towards the line of our ancient and rightful monarchs, as the only
refuge in the approaching storm--the rich are alarmed--the nobles are
disgusted--the populace are inflamed--and a band of patriots, whose
measures are more safe than their numbers are few, have resolved to set
up King Charles’s standard.’

‘But the military,’ said Darsie--‘how can you, with a body of unarmed
and disorderly insurgents, propose to encounter a regular army. The
Highlanders are now totally disarmed.’

‘In a great measure, perhaps,’ answered Redgauntlet; ‘but the policy
which raised the Highland regiments has provided for that. We have
already friends in these corps; nor can we doubt for a moment what their
conduct will be when the white cockade is once more mounted. The rest
of the standing army has been greatly reduced since the peace; and we
reckon confidently on our standard being joined by thousands of the
disbanded troops.’

‘Alas!’ said Darsie, ‘and is it upon such vague hopes as these, the
inconstant humour of a crowd or of a disbanded soldiery, that men of
honour are invited to risk their families, their property, their life?’

‘Men of honour, boy,’ said Redgauntlet, his eyes glancing with
impatience, ‘set life, property, family, and all at stake, when that
honour commands it! We are not now weaker than when seven men, landing
in the wilds of Moidart, shook the throne of the usurper till it
tottered--won two pitched fields, besides overrunning one kingdom and
the half of another, and, but for treachery, would have achieved what
their venturous successors are now to attempt in their turn.’

‘And will such an attempt be made in serious earnest?’ said Darsie.
‘Excuse me, my uncle, if I can scarce believe a fact so extraordinary.
Will there really be found men of rank and consequence sufficient to
renew the adventure of 1745?’

‘I will not give you my confidence by halves, Sir Arthur,’ replied his
uncle--‘Look at that scroll--what say you to these names?--Are they not
the flower of the western shires--of Wales of Scotland?’

‘The paper contains indeed the names of many that are great and noble,’
replied Darsie, after perusing it; ‘but’--

‘But what?’ asked his uncle, impatiently; ‘do you doubt the ability of
those nobles and gentlemen to furnish the aid in men and money at which
they are rated?’

‘Not their ability certainly,’ said Darsie, ‘for of that I am no
competent judge; but I see in this scroll the name of Sir Arthur Darsie
Redgauntlet of that Ilk, rated at a hundred men and upwards--I certainly
am ignorant how he is to redeem that pledge.’

‘I will be responsible for the men,’ replied Hugh Redgauntlet.

‘But, my dear uncle,’ added Darsie, ‘I hope for your sake that the other
individuals whose names are here written, have had more acquaintance
with your plan than I have been indulged with.’

‘For thee and thine I can be myself responsible,’ said Redgauntlet; ‘for
if thou hast not the courage to head the force of thy house, the leading
shall pass to other hands, and thy inheritance shall depart from thee
like vigour and verdure from a rotten branch. For these honourable
persons, a slight condition there is which they annex to their
friendship--something so trifling that it is scarce worthy of mention.
This boon granted to them by him who is most interested, there is no
question they will take the field in the manner there stated.’

Again Darsie perused the paper, and felt himself still less inclined to
believe that so many men of family and fortune were likely to embark in
an enterprise so fatal. It seemed as if some rash plotter had put
down at a venture the names of all whom common report tainted with
Jacobitism; or if it was really the act of the individuals named, he
suspected that they must be aware of some mode of excusing themselves
from compliance with its purport. It was impossible, he thought, that
Englishmen, of large fortune, who had failed to join Charles when he
broke into England at the head of a victorious army, should have the
least thoughts of encouraging a descent when circumstances were so much
less propitious. He therefore concluded the enterprise would fall to
pieces of itself, and that his best way was, in the meantime, to remain
silent, unless the actual approach of a crisis (which might, however,
never arrive) should compel him to give a downright refusal to his
uncle’s proposition; and if, in the interim, some door for escape should
be opened, he resolved within himself not to omit availing himself of
it.

Hugh Redgauntlet watched his nephew’s looks for some time, and then, as
if arriving from some other process of reasoning at the same conclusion,
he said, ‘I have told you, Sir Arthur, that I do not urge your immediate
accession to my proposal; indeed the consequences of a refusal would be
so dreadful to yourself, so destructive to all the hopes which I have
nursed, that I would not risk, by a moment’s impatience, the object of
my whole life. Yes, Arthur, I have been a self-denying hermit at one
time--at another, the apparent associate of outlaws and desperadoes--at
another, the subordinate agent of men whom I felt in every way my
inferiors--not for any selfish purpose of my own, no, not even to win
for myself the renown of being the principal instrument in restoring
my king and freeing my country. My first wish on earth is for
that restoration and that freedom--my next, that my nephew, the
representative of my house and of the brother of my love, may have the
advantage and the credit of all my efforts in the good cause. But,’ he
added, darting on Darsie one of his withering frowns, ‘if Scotland and
my father’s house cannot stand and flourish together, then perish the
very name of Redgauntlet! perish the son of my brother, with every
recollection of the glories of my family, of the affections of my youth,
rather than my country’s cause should be injured in the tithing of
a barley-corn! The spirit of Sir Alberick is alive within me at this
moment,’ he continued, drawing up his stately form and sitting erect in
his saddle, while he pressed his finger against his forehead; ‘and if
you yourself crossed my path in opposition, I swear, by the mark that
darkens my brow, that a new deed should be done--a new doom should be
deserved!’

He was silent, and his threats were uttered in a tone of voice so deeply
resolute, that Darsie’s heart sank within him, when he reflected on the
storm of passion which he must encounter, if he declined to join his
uncle in a project to which prudence and principle made him equally
adverse. He had scarce any hope left but in temporizing until he could
make his escape, and resolved to avail himself for that purpose of the
delay which his uncle seemed not unwilling to grant. The stern,
gloomy look of his companion became relaxed by degrees, and presently
afterwards he made a sign to Miss Redgauntlet to join the party, and
began a forced conversation on ordinary topics; in the course of which
Darsie observed that his sister seemed to speak under the most cautious
restraint, weighing every word before she uttered it, and always
permitting her uncle to give the tone to the conversation, though of the
most trifling kind. This seemed to him (such an opinion had he already
entertained of his sister’s good sense and firmness) the strongest proof
he had yet received of his uncle’s peremptory character, since he saw it
observed with so much deference by a young person whose sex might have
given her privileges, and who seemed by no means deficient either in
spirit or firmness.

The little cavalcade was now approaching the house of Father
Crackenthorp, situated, as the reader knows, by the side of the
Solway, and not far distant front a rude pier, near which lay several
fishing-boats, which frequently acted in a different capacity. The house
of the worthy publican was also adapted to the various occupations which
he carried on, being a large scrambling assemblage of cottages attached
to a house of two stories, roofed with flags of sandstone--the original
mansion, to which the extensions of Mr. Crackenthorp’s trade had
occasioned his making many additions. Instead of the single long
watering-trough which usually distinguishes the front of the English
public-house of the second class, there were three conveniences of that
kind, for the use, as the landlord used to say, of the troop-horses when
the soldiers came to search his house; while a knowing leer and a nod
let you understand what species of troops he was thinking of. A huge
ash-tree before the door, which had reared itself to a great size
and height, in spite of the blasts from the neighbouring Solway,
overshadowed, as usual, the ale-bench, as our ancestors called it,
where, though it was still early in the day, several fellows, who seemed
to be gentlemen’s servants, were drinking beer and smoking. One or two
of them wore liveries which seemed known to Mr. Redgauntlet, for he
muttered between his teeth, ‘Fools, fools! were they on a march to hell,
they must have their rascals in livery with them, that the whole world
might know who were going to be damned.’

As he thus muttered, he drew bridle before the door of the place,
from which several other lounging guests began to issue, to look with
indolent curiosity as usual, upon an ARRIVAL.

Redgauntlet sprang from his horse, and assisted his niece to dismount;
but, forgetting, perhaps, his nephew’s disguise, he did not pay him the
attention which his female dress demanded.

The situation of Darsie was indeed something awkward; for Cristal Nixon,
out of caution perhaps to prevent escape, had muffled the extreme folds
of the riding-skirt with which he was accoutred, around his ankles and
under his feet, and there secured it with large corking-pins. We presume
that gentlemen-cavaliers may sometimes cast their eyes to that part
of the person of the fair equestrians whom they chance occasionally to
escort; and if they will conceive their own feet, like Darsie’s, muffled
in such a labyrinth of folds and amplitude of robe, as modesty doubtless
induces the fair creatures to assume upon such occasions, they will
allow that, on a first attempt, they might find some awkwardness in
dismounting. Darsie, at least, was in such a predicament, for, not
receiving adroit assistance from the attendant of Mr. Redgauntlet, he
stumbled as he dismounted from the horse, and might have had a bad fall,
had it not been broken by the gallant interposition of a gentleman, who
probably was, on his part, a little surprised at the solid weight of the
distressed fair one whom he had the honour to receive in his embrace.
But what was his surprise to that of Darsie, when the hurry of the
moment and of the accident, permitted him to see that it was his friend
Alan Fairford in whose arms he found himself! A thousand apprehensions
rushed on him, mingled with the full career of hope and joy, inspired by
the unexpected appearance of his beloved friend at the very crisis, it
seemed, of his fate.

He was about to whisper in his ear, cautioning him at the same time to
be silent; yet he hesitated for a second or two to effect his purpose,
since, should Redgauntlet take the alarm from any sudden exclamation on
the part of Alan, there was no saying what consequences might ensue.

Ere he could decide what was to be done, Redgauntlet, who had entered
the house, returned hastily, followed by Cristal Nixon. ‘I’ll release
you of the charge of this young lady, sir;’ he said, haughtily, to Alan
Fairford, whom he probably did not recognize.

‘I had no desire to intrude, sir,’ replied Alan; ‘the lady’s situation
seemed to require assistance--and--but have I not the honour to speak to
Mr. Herries of Birrenswork?’

‘You are mistaken, sir,’ said Redgauntlet, turning short off, and
making a sign with his hand to Cristal, who hurried Darsie, however
unwillingly, into the house, whispering in his ear, ‘Come, miss, let us
have no making of acquaintance from the windows. Ladies of fashion must
be private. Show us a room, Father Crackenthorp.’

So saying, he conducted Darsie into the house, interposing at the same
time his person betwixt the supposed young lady and the stranger of whom
he was suspicious, so as to make communication by signs impossible. As
they entered, they heard the sound of a fiddle in the stone-floored
and well-sanded kitchen, through which they were about to follow their
corpulent host, and where several people seemed engaged in dancing to
its strains.

‘D--n thee,’ said Nixon to Crackenthorp, ‘would you have the lady go
through all the mob of the parish? Hast thou no more private way to our
sitting-room?’

‘None that is fit for my travelling,’ answered the landlord, laying his
hand on his portly stomach. ‘I am not Tom Turnpenny, to creep like a
lizard through keyholes.’

So saying, he kept moving on through the revellers in the kitchen; and
Nixon, holding Darsie by his arm, as if to offer the lady support but
in all probability to frustrate any effort at escape, moved through the
crowd, which presented a very motley appearance, consisting of domestic
servants, country fellows, seamen, and other idlers, whom Wandering
Willie was regaling with his music.

To pass another friend without intimation of his presence would have
been actual pusillanimity; and just when they were passing the blind
man’s elevated seat, Darsie asked him with some emphasis, whether he
could not play a Scottish air? The man’s face had been the instant
before devoid of all sort of expression, going through his performance
like a clown through a beautiful country, too much accustomed to
consider it as a task, to take any interest in the performance, and, in
fact, scarce seeming to hear the noise that he was creating. In a
word, he might at the time have made a companion to my friend Wilkie’s
inimitable blind crowder. But with Wandering Willie this was only an
occasional and a rare fit of dullness, such as will at times creep over
all the professors of the fine arts, arising either from fatigue, or
contempt of the present audience, or that caprice which so often tempts
painters and musicians and great actors, in the phrase of the latter, to
walk through their part, instead of exerting themselves with the energy
which acquired their fame. But when the performer heard the voice of
Darsie, his countenance became at once illuminated, and showed the
complete mistake of those who suppose that the principal point of
expression depends upon the eyes. With his face turned to the point from
which the sound came, his upper lip a little curved, and quivering with
agitation, and with a colour which surprise and pleasure had brought at
once into his faded cheek, he exchanged the humdrum hornpipe which he
had been sawing out with reluctant and lazy bow, for the fine Scottish
air,

  You’re welcome, Charlie Stuart,

which flew from his strings as if by inspiration and after a breathless
pause of admiration among the audience, was received with a clamour of
applause, which seemed to show that the name and tendency, as well as
the execution of the tune, was in the highest degree acceptable to all
the party assembled.

In the meantime, Cristal Nixon, still keeping hold of Darsie, and
following the landlord, forced his way with some difficulty through the
crowded kitchen, and entered a small apartment on the other side of it,
where they found Lilias Redgauntlet already seated. Here Nixon gave
way to his suppressed resentment, and turning sternly on Crackenthorp,
threatened him with his master’s severest displeasure, because things
were in such bad order to receive his family, when he had given such
special advice that he desired to be private. But Father Crackenthorp
was not a man to be brow-beaten.

‘Why, brother Nixon, thou art angry this morning,’ he replied; ‘hast
risen from thy wrong side, I think. You know, as well as I, that most of
this mob is of the squire’s own making--gentlemen that come with their
servants, and so forth, to meet him in the way of business, as old Tom
Turnpenny says--the very last that came was sent down with Dick Gardener
from Fairladies.’

‘But the blind scraping scoundrel yonder,’ said Nixon, ‘how dared you
take such a rascal as that across your threshold at such a time as this?
If the squire should dream you have a thought of peaching--I am only
speaking for your good, Father Crackenthorp.’

‘Why, look ye, brother Nixon,’ said Crackenthorp, turning his quid with
great composure, ‘the squire is a very worthy gentleman, and I’ll never
deny it; but I am neither his servant nor his tenant, and so he need
send me none of his orders till he hears I have put on his livery. As
for turning away folk from my door, I might as well plug up the ale-tap,
and pull down the sign--and as for peaching, and such like, the squire
will find the folk here are as honest to the full as those he brings
with him.’

‘How, you impudent lump of tallow,’ said Nixon, ‘what do you mean by
that?’

‘Nothing,’ said Crackenthorp, ‘but that I can tour out as well as
another--you understand me--keep good lights in my upper story--know a
thing or two more than most folk in this country. If folk will come to
my house on dangerous errands, egad they shall not find Joe Crackenthorp
a cat’s-paw. I’ll keep myself clear, you may depend on it, and let every
man answer for his own actions--that’s my way. Anything wanted, Master
Nixon?’

‘No--yes--begone!’ said Nixon, who seemed embarrassed with the
landlord’s contumacy, yet desirous to conceal the effect it produced on
him.

The door was no sooner closed on Crackenthorp, than Miss Redgauntlet,
addressing Nixon, commanded him to leave the room and go to his proper
place.

‘How, madam?’ said the fellow sullenly, yet with an air of respect,
‘Would you have your uncle pistol me for disobeying his orders?’

‘He may perhaps pistol you for some other reason, if you do not obey
mine,’ said Lilias, composedly.

‘You abuse your advantage over me, madam--I really dare not go--I am on
guard over this other miss here; and if I should desert my post, my life
were not worth five minutes’ purchase.’

‘Then know your post, sir,’ said Lilias, ‘and watch on the outside of
the door. You have no commission to listen to our private conversation,
I suppose? Begone, sir, without further speech or remonstrance, or I
will tell my uncle that which you would have reason to repent be should
know.’

The fellow looked at her with a singular expression of spite, mixed
with deference. ‘You abuse your advantages, madam,’ he said, ‘and act as
foolishly in doing so as I did in affording you such a hank over me. But
you are a tyrant; and tyrants have commonly short reigns.’

So saying, he left the apartment.

‘The wretch’s unparalleled insolence,’ said Lilias to her brother, ‘has
given me one great advantage over him. For knowing that my uncle would
shoot him with as little remorse as a woodcock, if he but guessed at his
brazen-faced assurance towards me, he dares not since that time assume,
so far as I am concerned, the air of insolent domination which the
possession of my uncle’s secrets, and the knowledge of his most secret
plans, have led him to exert over others of his family.’

‘In the meantime,’ said Darsie, ‘I am happy to see that the landlord
of the house does not seem so devoted to him as I apprehended; and this
aids the hope of escape which I am nourishing for you and for myself. O
Lilias! the truest of friends, Alan Fairford, is in pursuit of me, and
is here at this moment. Another humble, but, I think, faithful friend,
is also within these dangerous walls.’

Lilias laid her finger on her lips, and pointed to the door. Darsie took
the hint, lowered his voice, and informed her in whispers of the arrival
of Fairford, and that he believed he had opened a communication with
Wandering Willie. She listened with the utmost interest, and had just
begun to reply, when a loud noise was heard in the kitchen, caused
by several contending voices, amongst which Darsie thought he could
distinguish that of Alan Fairford.

Forgetting how little his own condition permitted him to become the
assistant of another, Darsie flew to the door of the room, and finding
it locked and bolted on the outside, rushed against it with all
his force, and made the most desperate efforts to burst it open,
notwithstanding the entreaties of his sister that he would compose
himself and recollect the condition in which he was placed. But the
door, framed to withstand attacks from excisemen, constables, and other
personages, considered as worthy to use what are called the king’s keys,
[In common parlance, a crowbar and hatchet.] ‘and therewith to make
lockfast places open and patent,’ set his efforts at defiance. Meantime
the noise continued without, and we are to give an account of its origin
in our next chapter.





NARRATIVE OF DARSIE LATIMER, CONTINUED

Joe Crackenthorp’s public-house had never, since it first reared
its chimneys on the banks of the Solway, been frequented by such a
miscellaneous group of visitors as had that morning become its guests.
Several of them were persons whose quality seemed much superior to
their dresses and modes of travelling. The servants who attended them
contradicted the inferences to be drawn from the garb of their masters,
and, according to the custom of the knights of the rainbow, gave many
hints that they were not people to serve any but men of first-rate
consequence. These gentlemen, who had come thither chiefly for the
purpose of meeting with Mr. Redgauntlet, seemed moody and anxious,
conversed and walked together apparently in deep conversation, and
avoided any communication with the chance travellers whom accident
brought that morning to the same place of resort.

As if Fate had set herself to confound the plans of the Jacobite
conspirators, the number of travellers was unusually great, their
appearance respectable, and they filled the public tap-room of the inn,
where the political guests had already occupied most of the private
apartments.

Amongst others, honest Joshua Geddes had arrived, travelling, as he
said, in the sorrow of the soul, and mourning for the fate of Darsie
Latimer as he would for his first-born child. He had skirted the whole
coast of the Solway, besides making various trips into the interior,
not shunning, on such occasions, to expose himself to the laugh of the
scorner, nay, even to serious personal risk, by frequenting the haunts
of smugglers, horse-jockeys, and other irregular persons, who looked
on his intrusion with jealous eyes, and were apt to consider him as
an exciseman in the disguise of a Quaker. All this labour and peril,
however, had been undergone in vain. No search he could make obtained
the least intelligence of Latimer, so that he began to fear the poor lad
had been spirited abroad--for the practice of kidnapping was then not
infrequent, especially on the western coasts of Britain--if indeed he
had escaped a briefer and more bloody fate.

With a heavy heart, he delivered his horse, even Solomon, into the hands
of the ostler, and walking into the inn, demanded from the landlord
breakfast and a private room. Quakers, and such hosts as old Father
Crackenthorp, are no congenial spirits; the latter looked askew over his
shoulder, and replied, ‘If you would have breakfast here, friend, you
are like to eat it where other folk eat theirs.’

‘And wherefore can I not,’ said the Quaker, ‘have an apartment to
myself, for my money?’

‘Because, Master Jonathan, you must wait till your betters be served, or
else eat with your equals.’

Joshua Geddes argued the point no further, but sitting quietly down on
the seat which Crackenthorp indicated to him, and calling for a pint
of ale, with some bread, butter, and Dutch cheese, began to satisfy the
appetite which the morning air had rendered unusually alert.

While the honest Quaker was thus employed, another stranger entered the
apartment, and sat down near to the table on which his victuals were
placed. He looked repeatedly at Joshua, licked his parched and chopped
lips as he saw the good Quaker masticate his bread and cheese, and
sucked up his thin chops when Mr. Geddes applied the tankard to his
mouth, as if the discharge of these bodily functions by another had
awakened his sympathies in an uncontrollable degree. At last, being
apparently unable to withstand his longings, he asked, in a faltering
tone, the huge landlord, who was tramping through the room in all
corpulent impatience, whether he could have a plack-pie?’

‘Never heard of such a thing, master,’ said the landlord, and was about
to trudge onward; when the guest, detaining him, said, in a strong
Scottish tone, ‘Ya will maybe have nae whey then, nor buttermilk, nor ye
couldna exhibit a souter’s clod?’

‘Can’t tell what ye are talking about, master,’ said Crackenthorp.

‘Then ye will have nae breakfast that will come within ‘the compass of a
shilling Scots?’

‘Which is a penny sterling,’ answered Crackenthorp, with a sneer. ‘Why,
no, Sawney, I can’t say as we have--we can’t afford it; But you shall
have a bellyful for love, as we say in the bull-ring.’

‘I shall never refuse a fair offer,’ said the poverty-stricken guest;
‘and I will say that for the English, if they were deils, that they are
a ceeveleesed people to gentlemen that are under a cloud.’

‘Gentlemen!--humph!’ said Crackenthorp--‘not a blue-cap among them but
halts upon that foot.’ Then seizing on a dish which still contained a
huge cantle of what had been once a princely mutton pasty, he placed
it on the table before the stranger, saying, ‘There, master gentleman;
there is what is worth all the black pies, as you call them, that were
ever made of sheep’s head.’

‘Sheep’s head is a gude thing, for a’ that,’ replied the guest; but
not being spoken so loud as to offend his hospitable entertainer, the
interjection might pass for a private protest against the scandal thrown
out against the standing dish of Caledonia.

This premised, he immediately began to transfer the mutton and
pie-crust from his plate to his lips, in such huge gobbets, as if he was
refreshing after a three days’ fast, and laying in provisions against a
whole Lent to come.

Joshua Geddes in his turn gazed on him with surprise, having never, he
thought, beheld such a gaunt expression of hunger in the act of eating.
‘Friend,’ he said, after watching him for some minutes, ‘if thou gorgest
thyself in this fashion, thou wilt assuredly choke. Wilt thou not take a
draught out of my cup to help down all that dry meat?’

‘Troth,’ said the stranger, stopping and looking at the friendly
propounder, ‘that’s nae bad overture, as they say in the General
Assembly. I have heard waur motions than that frae wiser counsel.’

Mr. Geddes ordered a quart of home-brewed to be placed before our friend
Peter Peebles; for the reader must have already conceived that this
unfortunate litigant was the wanderer in question.

The victim of Themis had no sooner seen the flagon, than he seized
it with the same energy which he had displayed in operating upon the
pie--puffed off the froth with such emphasis, that some of it lighted on
Mr. Geddes’s head--and then said, as if with it sudden recollection of
what was due to civility, ‘Here’s to ye, friend. What! are ye ower grand
to give me an answer, or are ye dull o’ hearing?’

‘I prithee drink thy liquor, friend,’ said the good Quaker; ‘thou
meanest it in civility, but we care not for these idle fashions.’

‘What! ye are a Quaker, are ye?’ said Peter; and without further
ceremony reared the flagon to his head, from which he withdrew it not
while a single drop of ‘barley-broo’ remained. ‘That’s done you and
me muckle gude,’ he said, sighing as he set down his pot; ‘but twa
mutchkins o’ yill between twa folk is a drappie ower little measure.
What say ye to anither pot? or shall we cry in a blithe Scots pint at
ance? The yill is no amiss.’

‘Thou mayst call for what thou wilt on thine own charges, friend,’ said
Geddes; ‘for myself, I willingly contribute to the quenching of thy
natural thirst; but I fear it were no such easy matter to relieve thy
acquired and artificial drought.’

‘That is to say, in plain terms, ye are for withdrawing your caution
with the folk of the house? You Quaker folk are but fause comforters;
but since ye have garred me drink sae muckle cauld yill--me that am no
used to the like of it in the forenoon--I think ye might as weel have
offered me a glass of brandy or usquabae--I’m nae nice body--I can drink
onything that’s wet and toothsome.’

‘Not a drop at my cost, friend,’ quoth Geddes. ‘Thou art an old man, and
hast perchance a heavy and long journey before thee. Thou art, moreover,
my countryman, as I judge from thy tongue; and I will not give thee the
means of dishonouring thy grey hairs in a strange land.’

‘Grey hairs, neighbour!’ said Peter, with a wink to the bystanders, whom
this dialogue began to interest, and who were in hopes of seeing the
Quaker played off by the crazed beggar, for such Peter Peebles appeared
to be. ‘Grey hairs! The Lord mend your eyesight, neighbour, that disna
ken grey hairs frae a tow wig!’

This jest procured a shout of laughter, and, what was still more
acceptable than dry applause, a man who stood beside called out, ‘Father
Crackenthorp, bring a nipperkin of brandy. I’ll bestow a dram on this
fellow, were it but for that very word.’

The brandy was immediately brought by a wench who acted as barmaid; and
Peter, with a grin of delight, filled a glass, quaffed it off, and then
saying, ‘God bless me! I was so unmannerly as not to drink to ye--I
think the Quaker has smitten me wi’ his ill-bred havings,’--he was about
to fill another, when his hand was arrested by his new friend; who said
at the same time, ‘No, no, friend--fair play’s a jewel--time about, if
you please.’ And filling a glass for himself, emptied it as gallantly
as Peter could have done. ‘What say you to that, friend?’ he continued,
addressing the Quaker.

‘Nay, friend,’ answered Joshua, ‘it went down thy throat, not mine; and
I have nothing to say about what concerns me not; but if thou art a
man of humanity, thou wilt not give this poor creature the means of
debauchery. Bethink thee that they will spurn him from the door, as
they would do a houseless and masterless dog, and that he may die on the
sands or on the common. And if he has through thy means been rendered
incapable of helping himself, thou shalt not be innocent of his blood.’

‘Faith, Broadbrim, I believe thou art right, and the old gentleman in
the flaxen jazy shall have no more of the comforter. Besides, we have
business in hand to-day, and this fellow, for as mad as he looks, may
have a nose on his face after all. Hark ye, father,--what is your name,
and what brings you into such an out-of-the-way corner?’

‘I am not just free to condescend on my name,’ said Peter; ‘and as for
my business--there is a wee dribble of brandy in the stoup--it would be
wrang to leave it to the lass--it is learning her bad usages.’

‘Well, thou shalt have the brandy, and be d--d to thee, if thou wilt
tell me what you are making here.’

‘Seeking a young advocate chap that they ca’ Alan Fairford, that has
played me a slippery trick, and ye maun ken a’ about the cause,’ said
Peter.

‘An advocate, man!’ answered the captain of the JUMPING JENNY--for it
was he, and no other, who had taken compassion on Peter’s drought;
‘why, Lord help thee, thou art on the wrong side of the Firth to seek
advocates, whom I take to be Scottish lawyers, not English.’

‘English lawyers, man!’ exclaimed Peter, ‘the deil a lawyer’s in a’
England.’

‘I wish from my soul it were true,’ said Ewart; ‘but what the devil put
that in your head?’

‘Lord, man, I got a grip of ane of their attorneys in Carlisle, and he
tauld me that there wasna a lawyer in England ony mair than himsell that
kend the nature of a multiple-poinding! And when I told him how this
loopy lad, Alan Fairford, had served me, he said I might bring an action
on the case--just as if the case hadna as mony actions already as one
case can weel carry. By my word, it is a gude case, and muckle has it
borne, in its day, of various procedure--but it’s the barley-pickle
breaks the naig’s back, and wi’ my consent it shall not hae ony mair
burden laid upon it.’

‘But this Alan Fairford?’ said Nanty--‘come--sip up the drop of brandy,
man, and tell me some more about him, and whether you are seeking him
for good or for harm.’

‘For my ain gude, and for his harm, to be sure,’ said Peter. ‘Think of
his having left my cause in the dead-thraw between the tyneing and
the winning, and capering off into Cumberland here, after a wild
loup-the-tether lad they ca’ Darsie Latimer.’

‘Darsie Latimer!’ said Mr. Geddes, hastily; ‘do you know anything of
Darsie Latimer?’

‘Maybe I do, and maybe I do not,’ answered Peter; ‘I am no free to
answer every body’s interrogatory, unless it is put judicially, and by
form of law--specially where folk think so much of a caup of sour yill,
or a thimblefu’ of brandy. But as for this gentleman, that has shown
himself a gentleman at breakfast, and will show himself a gentleman at
the meridian, I am free to condescend upon any points in the cause that
may appear to bear upon the question at issue.’

‘Why, all I want to know from you, my friend, is, whether you are
seeking to do this Mr. Alan Fairford good or harm; because if you come
to do him good, I think you could maybe get speech of him--and if to do
him harm, I will take the liberty to give you a cast across the Firth,
with fair warning not to come back on such an errand, lest worse come of
it.’

The manner and language of Ewart were such that Joshua Geddes resolved
to keep cautious silence, till he could more plainly discover whether he
was likely to aid or impede him in his researches after Darsie Latimer.
He therefore determined to listen attentively to what should pass
between Peter and the seaman, and to watch for an opportunity of
questioning the former, so soon as he should be separated from his new
acquaintance.

‘I wad by no means,’ said Peter Peebles, ‘do any substantial harm to the
poor lad Fairford, who has had mony a gowd guinea of mine, as weel as
his father before him; but I wad hae him brought back to the minding of
my business and his ain; and maybe I wadna insist further in my action
of damages against him, than for refunding the fees, and for some annual
rent on the principal sum due frae the day on which he should have
recovered it for me, plack and bawbee, at the great advising; for ye
are aware, that is the least that I can ask NOMINE DAMNI; and I have nae
thought to break down the lad bodily a’thegither--we maun live and let
live--forgie and forget.’

‘The deuce take me, friend Broadbrim,’ said Nanty Ewart, looking to the
Quaker, ‘if I can make out what this old scarecrow means. If I thought
it was fitting that Master Fairford should see him, why perhaps it is
a matter that could be managed. Do you know anything about the old
fellow?--you seemed to take some charge of him just now.’

‘No more than I should have done by any one in distress,’ said Geddes,
not sorry to be appealed to; ‘but I will try what I can do to find out
who he is, and what he is about in this country. But are we not a little
too public in this open room?’

‘It’s well thought of,’ said Nanty; and at his command the barmaid
ushered the party into a side-booth, Peter attending them in the
instinctive hope that there would be more liquor drunk among them before
parting. They had scarce sat down in their new apartment, when the sound
of a violin was heard in the room which they had just left.

‘I’ll awa back yonder,’ said Peter, rising up again; ‘yon’s the sound of
a fiddle, and when there is music, there’s ay something ganging to eat
or drink.’

‘I am just going to order something here,’ said the Quaker; ‘but in the
meantime, have you any objection, my good friend, to tell us your name?’

‘None in the world, if you are wanting to drink to me by name and
surname,’ answered Peebles; ‘but, otherwise, I would rather evite your
interrogatories.’

‘Friend,’ said the Quaker, ‘it is not for thine own health, seeing thou
hast drunk enough already--however--here, handmaiden--bring me a gill of
sherry.’

‘Sherry’s but shilpit drink, and a gill’s a sma’ measure for twa
gentlemen to crack ower at their first acquaintance. But let us see your
sneaking gill of sherry,’ said Poor Peter, thrusting forth his huge
hand to seize on the diminutive pewter measure, which, according to the
fashion of the time, contained the generous liquor freshly drawn from
the butt.

‘Nay, hold, friend,’ said Joshua, ‘thou hast not yet told me what name
and surname I am to call thee by.’

‘D--d sly in the Quaker,’ said Nanty, apart, ‘to make him pay for his
liquor before he gives it him. Now, I am such a fool, that I should have
let him get too drunk to open his mouth, before I thought of asking him
a question.’

‘My name is Peter Peebles, then,’ said the litigant, rather sulkily,
as one who thought his liquor too sparingly meted out to him; ‘and what
have you to say to that?’

‘Peter Peebles?’ repeated Nanty Ewart and seemed to muse upon something
which the words brought to his remembrance, while the Quaker pursued his
examination.

‘But I prithee, Peter Peebles, what is thy further designation? Thou
knowest, in our country, that some men are distinguished by their craft
and calling, as cordwainers, fishers, weavers, or the like, and some by
their titles as proprietors of land (which savours of vanity)--now, how
may you be distinguished from others of the same name?’

‘As Peter Peebles of the great plea of Poor Peter Peebles against
Plainstanes, ET PER CONTRA--if I am laird of naething else, I am ay a
DOMINUS LITIS.’

‘It’s but a poor lairdship, I doubt,’ said Joshua.

‘Pray, Mr. Peebles,’ said Nanty, interrupting the conversation abruptly,
‘were not you once a burgess of Edinburgh?’

‘WAS I a burgess!’ said Peter indignantly, ‘and AM I not a burgess even
now? I have done nothing to forfeit my right, I trow--once provost and
ay my lord.’

‘Well, Mr. Burgess, tell me further, have you not some property in the
Gude Town?’ continued Ewart.

‘Troth have I--that is, before my misfortunes, I had twa or three bonny
bits of mailings amang the closes and wynds, forby the shop and the
story abune it. But Plainstanes has put me to the causeway now. Never
mind though, I will be upsides with him yet.’

‘Had not you once a tenement in the Covenant Close?’ again demanded
Nanty.

‘You have hit it, lad, though ye look not like a Covenanter,’ said
Peter; ‘we’ll drink to its memory--(Hout! the heart’s at the mouth o’
that ill-faur’d bit stoup already!)--it brought a rent, reckoning from
the crawstep to the groundsill, that ye might ca’ fourteen punds a year,
forby the laigh cellar that was let to Lucky Littleworth.’

‘And do you not remember that you had a poor old lady for your tenant,
Mrs. Cantrips of Kittlebasket?’ said Nanty, suppressing his emotion with
difficulty.

‘Remember! G--d, I have gude cause to remember her,’ said Peter, ‘for
she turned a dyvour on my hands, the auld besom! and after a’ that the
law could do to make me satisfied and paid, in the way of poinding and
distrenzieing and sae forth, as the law will, she ran awa to the charity
workhouse, a matter of twenty punds Scots in my debt--it’s a great shame
and oppression that charity workhouse, taking in bankrupt dyvours that
canna, pay their honest creditors.’

‘Methinks, friend,’ said the Quaker, ‘thine own rags might teach thee
compassion for other people’s nakedness.’

‘Rags!’ said Peter, taking Joshua’s words literally; ‘does ony wise body
put on their best coat when they are travelling, and keeping company
with Quakers, and such other cattle as the road affords?’

‘The old lady DIED, I have heard,’ said Nanty, affecting a moderation
which was belied by accents that faltered with passion.

‘She might live or die, for what I care,’ answered Peter the Cruel;
‘what business have folk to do to live that canna live as law will, and
satisfy their just and lawful creditors?’

‘And you--you that are now yourself trodden down in the very kennel,
are you not sorry for what you have done? Do you not repent having
occasioned the poor widow woman’s death?’

‘What for should I repent?’ said Peter; ‘the law was on my side--a
decreet of the bailies, followed by poinding, and an act of warding--a
suspension intented, and the letters found orderly proceeded. I followed
the auld rudas through twa courts--she cost me mair money than her lugs
were worth.’

‘Now, by Heaven!’ said Nanty, ‘I would give a thousand guineas, if I had
them, to have you worth my beating! Had you said you repented, it had
been between God and your conscience; but to hear you boast of your
villany--Do you think it little to have reduced the aged to famine, and
the young to infamy--to have caused the death of one woman, the ruin of
another, and to have driven a man to exile and despair? By Him that made
me, I can scarce keep hands off you!

‘Off me? I defy ye!’ said Peter. ‘I take this honest man to witness that
if ye stir the neck of my collar, I will have my action for stouthreif,
spulzie, oppression, assault and battery. Here’s a bra’ din, indeed,
about an auld wife gaun to the grave, a young limmer to the close-heads
and causeway, and a sticket stibbler [A student of divinity who has not
been able to complete his studies on theology.] to the sea instead of
the gallows!’

‘Now, by my soul,’ said Nanty, ‘this is too much! and since you can feel
no otherwise, I will try if I cannot beat some humanity into your head
and shoulders.’

He drew his hanger as he spoke, and although Joshua, who had in vain
endeavoured to interrupt the dialogue to which he foresaw a violent
termination, now threw himself between Nanty and the old litigant, he
could not prevent the latter from receiving two or three sound slaps
over the shoulder with the flat side of the weapon.

Poor Peter Peebles, as inglorious in his extremity as he had been
presumptuous in bringing it on, now ran and roared, and bolted out of
the apartment and house itself, pursued by Nanty, whose passion became
high in proportion to his giving way to its dictates, and by Joshua, who
still interfered at every risk, calling upon Nanty to reflect on the
age and miserable circumstances of the offender, and upon Poor Peter
to stand and place himself under his protection. In front of the house,
however, Peter Peebles found a more efficient protector than the worthy
Quaker.





NARRATIVE OF ALAN FAIRFORD

Our readers may recollect that Fairford had been conducted by Dick
Gardener from the house of Fairladies to the inn of old Father
Crackenthorp, in order, as he had been informed by the mysterious Father
Buonaventure, that he might have the meeting which he desired with Mr.
Redgauntlet, to treat with him for the liberty of his friend Darsie. His
guide, by the special direction of Mr. Ambrose, had introduced him into
the public-house by a back-door, and recommended to the landlord to
accommodate him with a private apartment, and to treat him with all
civility; but in other respects to keep his eye on him, and even to
secure his person, if he saw any reason to suspect him to be a spy. He
was not, however, subjected to any direct restraint, but was ushered
into an apartment where he was requested to await the arrival of
the gentleman with whom he wished to have an interview, and who, as
Crackenthorp assured, him with a significant nod, would be certainly
there in the course of an hour. In the meanwhile, he recommended to him,
with another significant sign, to keep his apartment, ‘as there were
people in the house who were apt to busy themselves about other folk’s
matters.’

Alan Fairford complied with the recommendation, so long as he thought
it reasonable; but when, among a large party riding up to the house, he
discerned Redgauntlet, whom he had seen under the name of Mr. Herries
of Birrenswork, and whom, by his height and strength, he easily
distinguished from the rest, he thought it proper to go down to the
front of the house, in hopes that, by more closely reconnoitring the
party, he might discover if his friend Darsie was among them.

The reader is aware that, by doing so, he had an opportunity of breaking
Darsie’s fall from his side-saddle, although his disguise and mask
prevented his recognizing his friend. It may be also recollected that
while Nixon hurried Miss Redgauntlet and her brother into the house,
their uncle, somewhat chafed at an unexpected and inconvenient
interruption, remained himself in parley with Fairford, who had already
successively addressed him by the names of Herries and Redgauntlet;
neither of which, any more than the acquaintance of the young lawyer,
he seemed at the moment willing to acknowledge, though an air of haughty
indifference, which he assumed, could not conceal his vexation and
embarrassment.

‘If we must needs be acquainted, sir,’ he said at last--‘for which I
am unable to see any necessity, especially as I am now particularly
disposed to be private--I must entreat you will tell me at once what you
have to say, and permit me to attend to matters of more importance.’

‘My introduction,’ said Fairford, ‘is contained in this
letter.--(Delivering that of Maxwell.)--I am convinced that, under
whatever name it may be your pleasure for the present to be known, it is
into your hands, and yours only, that it should be delivered.’

Redgauntlet turned the letter in his hand--then read the contents then
again looked upon the letter, and sternly observed, ‘The seal of the
letter has been broken. Was this the case, sir, when it was delivered
into your hand?’

Fairford despised a falsehood as much as any man,--unless, perhaps, as
Tom Turnpenny might have said, ‘in the way of business.’ He answered
readily and firmly, ‘The seal was whole when the letter was delivered to
me by Mr. Maxwell of Summertrees.’

‘And did you dare, sir, to break the seal of a letter addressed to me?’
said Redgauntlet, not sorry, perhaps, to pick a quarrel upon a point
foreign to the tenor of the epistle.

‘I have never broken the seal of any letter committed to my charge,’
said Alan; ‘not from fear of those to whom such letter might be
addressed, but from respect to myself.’

‘That is well worded,’ said Redgauntlet; ‘and yet, young Mr. Counsellor,
I doubt whether your delicacy prevented your reading my letter, or
listening to the contents as read by some other person after it was
opened.’

‘I certainly did hear the contents read over,’ said Fairford; ‘and they
were such as to surprise me a good deal.’

‘Now that,’ said Redgauntlet, ‘I hold to be pretty much the same, IN
FORO CONSCIENTIAE, as if you had broken the seal yourself. I shall hold
myself excused from entering upon further discourse with a messenger
so faithless; and you may thank yourself if your journey has been
fruitless.’

‘Stay, sir,’ said Fairford; ‘and know that I became acquainted with the
contents of the paper without my consent--I may even say, against my
will; for Mr. Buonaventure’--

‘Who?’ demanded Redgauntlet, in a wild and alarmed manner--‘WHOM was it
you named?’

‘Father Buonaventure,’ said Alan,--‘a Catholic priest, as I apprehend,
whom I saw at the Misses Arthuret’s house, called Fairladies.’

‘Misses Arthuret!--Fairladies!--A Catholic priest!--Father
Buonaventure!’ said Redgauntlet, repeating the words of Alan with
astonishment.--‘Is it possible that human rashness can reach such a
point of infatuation? Tell me the truth, I conjure you, sir. I have
the deepest interest to know whether this is more than an idle legend,
picked up from hearsay about the country. You are a lawyer, and know the
risk incurred by the Catholic clergy, whom the discharge of their duty
sends to these bloody shores.’

‘I am a lawyer, certainly,’ said Fairford; ‘but my holding such a
respectable condition in life warrants that I am neither an informer
nor a spy. Here is sufficient evidence that I have seen Father
Buonaventure.’

He put Buonaventure’s letter into Redgauntlet’s hand, and watched his
looks closely while he read it. ‘Double-dyed infatuation!’ he muttered,
with looks in which sorrow, displeasure, and anxiety were mingled.
‘“Save me from the indiscretion of my friends,” says the Spaniard; “I
can save myself from the hostility of my enemies.”’

He then read the letter attentively, and for two or three minutes
was lost in thought, while some purpose of importance seemed to have
gathered and sit brooding upon his countenance. He held up his finger
towards his satellite, Cristal Nixon, who replied to his signal with a
prompt nod; and with one or two of the attendants approached Fairford in
such a manner as to make him apprehensive they were about to lay hold of
him.

At this moment a noise was heard from withinside of the house, and
presently rushed forth Peter Peebles, pursued by Nanty Ewart with his
drawn hanger, and the worthy Quaker, who was endeavouring to prevent
mischief to others, at some risk of bringing it on himself.

A wilder and yet a more absurd figure can hardly be imagined, than that
of Poor Peter clattering along as fast as his huge boots would permit
him, and resembling nothing so much as a flying scarecrow; while the
thin emaciated form of Nanty Ewart, with the hue of death on his cheek,
and the fire of vengeance glancing from his eye, formed a ghastly
contrast with the ridiculous object of his pursuit.

Redgauntlet threw himself between them. ‘What extravagant folly is
this?’ he said. ‘Put up your weapon, captain. Is this a time to indulge
in drunken brawls, or is such a miserable object as that a fitting
antagonist for a man of courage?’

‘I beg pardon,’ said the captain, sheathing his weapon--‘I was a little
bit out of the way, to be sure; but to know the provocation, a man must
read my heart, and that I hardly dare to do myself. But the wretch is
safe from me. Heaven has done its own vengeance on us both.’

While he spoke in this manner, Peter Peebles, who had at first crept
behind Redgauntlet in bodily fear, began now to reassume his spirits.
Pulling his protector by the sleeve, ‘Mr. Herries--Mr. Herries,’ he
whispered, eagerly, ‘ye have done me mair than ae gude turn, and if ye
will but do me anither at this dead pinch, I’ll forgie the girded keg of
brandy that you and Captain Sir Harry Redgimlet drank out yon time. Ye
sall hae an ample discharge and renunciation, and, though I should see
you walking at the Cross of Edinburgh, or standing at the bar of the
Court of Justiciary, no the very thumbikins themselves should bring to
my memory that ever I saw you in arms yon day.’

He accompanied this promise by pulling so hard at Redgauntlet’s cloak,
that he at last turned round. ‘Idiot! speak in a word what you want.’

‘Aweel, aweel. In a word, then,’ said Peter Peebles, ‘I have a warrant
on me to apprehend that man that stands there, Alan Fairford by name,
and advocate by calling. I bought it from Maister Justice Foxley’s
clerk, Maister Nicholas Faggot, wi’ the guinea that you gied me.

‘Ha!’ said Redgauntlet, ‘hast thou really such a warrant? let me see it.
Look sharp that no one escape, Cristal Nixon.’

Peter produced a huge, greasy, leathern pocketbook, too dirty to
permit its original colour to be visible, filled with scrolls of notes,
memorials to counsel, and Heaven knows what besides. From amongst this
precious mass he culled forth a paper, and placed it in the hands of
Redgauntlet, or Herries, as he continued to call him, saying, at the
same time, ‘It’s a formal and binding warrant, proceeding on my affidavy
made, that the said Alan Fairford, being lawfully engaged in my service,
had slipped the tether and fled over the Border, and was now lurking
there and thereabouts, to elude and evite the discharge of his bounden
duty to me; and therefore granting warrant to constables and others,
to seek for, take, and apprehend him, that he may be brought before
the Honourable Justice Foxley for examination, and, if necessary, for
commitment. Now, though a’ this be fairly set down, as I tell ye, yet
where am I to get an officer to execute this warrant in sic a country as
this, where swords and pistols flee out at a word’s speaking, and folk
care as little for the peace of King George as the peace of Auld King
Coul? There’s that drunken skipper, and that wet Quaker, enticed me into
the public this morning, and because I wadna gie them’ as much brandy as
wad have made them blind-drunk, they baith fell on me, and were in the
way of guiding me very ill.’

While Peter went on in this manner, Redgauntlet glanced his eye over the
warrant, and immediately saw that it must be a trick passed by Nicholas
Faggot, to cheat the poor insane wretch out of his solitary guinea. But
the Justice had actually subscribed it, as he did whatever his clerk
presented to him, and Redgauntlet resolved to use it for his own
purposes.

Without making any direct answer, therefore, to Peter Peebles, he walked
up gravely to Fairford, who had waited quietly for the termination of
a scene in which he was not a little surprised to find his client, Mr.
Peebles, a conspicuous actor.

‘Mr. Fairford,’ said Redgauntlet, ‘there are many reasons which might
induce me to comply with the request, or rather the injunctions, of the
excellent Father Buonaventure, that I should communicate with you upon
the present condition of my ward, whom you know under the name of
Darsie Latimer; but no man is better aware than you that the law must be
obeyed, even in contradiction to our own feelings; now this poor man
has obtained a warrant for carrying you before a magistrate, and, I am
afraid, there is a necessity of your yielding to it, although to the
postponement of the business which you may have with me.’

‘A warrant against me!’ said Alan, indignantly; ‘and at that poor
miserable wretch’s instance?--why, this is a trick, a mere and most
palpable trick.’

‘It may be so,’ replied Redgauntlet, with great equanimity; ‘doubtless
you know best; only the writ appears regular, and with that respect
for the law which has been,’ he said, with hypocritical formality, ‘a
leading feature of my character through life, I cannot dispense with
giving my poor aid to the support of a legal warrant. Look at it
yourself, and be satisfied it is no trick of mine.’

Fairford ran over the affidavit and the warrant, and then exclaimed once
more, that it was an impudent imposition, and that he would hold those
who acted upon such a warrant liable in the highest damages. ‘I guess
at your motive, Mr. Redgauntlet,’ he said, ‘for acquiescing in so
ridiculous a proceeding. But be assured you will find that, in this
country, one act of illegal violence will not be covered or atoned for
by practising another. You cannot, as a man of sense and honour, pretend
to say you regard this as a legal warrant.’

‘I am no lawyer, sir,’ said Redgauntlet; ‘and pretend not to know what
is or is not law--the warrant is quite formal, and that is enough for
me.’

‘Did ever any one hear,’ said Fairford, ‘of an advocate being compelled
to return to his task, like a collier or a salter [See Note 10.] who has
deserted his master?’

‘I see no reason why he should not,’ said Redgauntlet, dryly, ‘unless
on the ground that the services of the lawyer are the most expensive and
least useful of the two.’

‘You cannot mean this in earnest,’ said Fairford; ‘you cannot really
mean to avail yourself of so poor a contrivance, to evade the word
pledged by your friend, your ghostly father, in my behalf. I may have
been a fool for trusting it too easily, but think what you must be if
you can abuse my confidence in this manner. I entreat you to reflect
that this usage releases me from all promises of secrecy or connivance
at what I am apt to think are very dangerous practices, and that’--

‘Hark ye, Mr. Fairford,’ said Redgauntlet; ‘I must here interrupt you
for your own sake. One word of betraying what you may have seen, or what
you may have suspected, and your seclusion is like to have either a very
distant or a very brief termination; in either case a most undesirable
one. At present, you are sure of being at liberty in a very few
days--perhaps much sooner.’

‘And my friend,’ said Alan Fairford, ‘for whose sake I have run myself
into this danger, what is to become of him? Dark and dangerous man!’ he
exclaimed, raising his voice, I will not be again cajoled by deceitful
promises’--

‘I give you my honour that your friend is well,’ interrupted
Redgauntlet; ‘perhaps I may permit you to see him, if you will but
submit with patience to a fate which is inevitable.’

But Alan Fairford, considering his confidence as having been abused,
first by Maxwell, and next by the priest, raised his voice, and appealed
to all the king’s lieges within hearing, against the violence with
which he was threatened. He was instantly seized on by Nixon and two
assistants, who, holding down his arms, and endeavouring to stop his
mouth, were about to hurry him away.

The honest Quaker, who had kept out of Redgauntlet’s presence, now came
boldly forward.

‘Friend,’ said he, ‘thou dost more than thou canst answer. Thou knowest
me well, and thou art aware that in me thou hast a deeply injured
neighbour, who was dwelling beside thee in the honesty and simplicity of
his heart.’

‘Tush, Jonathan,’ said Redgauntlet; ‘talk not to me, man; it is neither
the craft of a young lawyer, nor the SIMPLICITY of an old hypocrite, can
drive me from my purpose.

‘By my faith,’ said the captain, coming forward in his turn, ‘this is
hardly fair, general; and I doubt,’ he added, ‘whether the will of my
owners can make me a party to such proceedings. Nay, never fumble with
your sword-hilt, but out with it like a man, if you are for a tilting.’
He unsheathed his hanger, and continued--‘I will neither see my comrade
Fairford, nor the old Quaker, abused. D----n all warrants, false or
true--curse the justice--confound the constable!--and here stands little
Nanty Ewart to make good what he says against gentle and simple, in
spite of horse-shoe or horse-radish either.’

The cry of ‘Down with all warrants!’ was popular in the ears of the
militia of the inn, and Nanty Ewart was no less so. Fishers, ostlers,
seamen, smugglers, began to crowd to the spot. Crackenthorp endeavoured
in vain to mediate. The attendants of Redgauntlet began to handle their
firearms; but their master shouted to them to forbear, and, unsheathing
his sword as quick as lightning, he rushed on Ewart in the midst of
his bravado, and struck his weapon from his hand with such address and
force, that it flew three yards from him. Closing with him at the same
moment, he gave him a severe fall, and waved his sword over his head, to
show he was absolutely at his mercy.

‘There, you drunken vagabond,’ he said, ‘I give you your life--you are
no bad fellow if you could keep from brawling among your friends. But
we all know Nanty Ewart,’ he said to the crowd around, with a forgiving
laugh, which, joined to the awe his prowess had inspired, entirely
confirmed their wavering allegiance.

They shouted, ‘The laird for ever!’ while poor Nanty, rising from the
earth, on whose lap he had been stretched so rudely, went in quest of
his hanger, lifted it, wiped it, and, as he returned the weapon to the
scabbard, muttered between his teeth, ‘It is true they say of him, and
the devil will stand his friend till his hour come; I will cross him no
more.’

So saying, he slunk from the crowd, cowed and disheartened by his
defeat.

‘For you, Joshua Geddes,’ said Redgauntlet, approaching the Quaker, who,
with lifted hands and eyes, had beheld the scene of violence, ‘l shall
take the liberty to arrest thee for a breach of the peace, altogether
unbecoming thy pretended principles; and I believe it will go hard with
thee both in a court of justice and among thine own Society of Friends,
as they call themselves, who will be but indifferently pleased to
see the quiet tenor of their hypocrisy insulted by such violent
proceedings.’

‘I violent!’ said Joshua; ‘I do aught unbecoming the principles of the
Friends! I defy thee, man, and I charge thee, as a Christian, to forbear
vexing my soul with such charges: it is grievous enough to me to have
seen violences which I was unable to prevent.’

‘O Joshua, Joshua!’ said Redgauntlet, with a sardonic smile; ‘thou light
of the faithful in the town of Dumfries and the places adjacent, wilt
thou thus fall away from the truth? Hast thou not, before us all,
attempted to rescue a man from the warrant of law? Didst thou not
encourage that drunken fellow to draw his weapon--and didst thou not
thyself flourish thy cudgel in the cause? Think’st thou that the oaths
of the injured Peter Peebles, and the conscientious Cristal Nixon,
besides those of such gentlemen as look on this strange scene, who not
only put on swearing as a garment, but to whom, in Custom House matters,
oaths are literally meat and drink,--dost thou not think, I say, that
these men’s oaths will go further than thy Yea and Nay in this matter?’

‘I will swear to anything,’ said Peter. ‘All is fair when it comes to an
oath AD LITEM.’

‘You do me foul wrong,’ said the Quaker, undismayed by the general
laugh. ‘I encouraged no drawing of weapons, though I attempted to move
an unjust man by some use of argument--I brandished no cudgel, although
it may be that the ancient Adam struggled within me, and caused my hand
to grasp mine oaken staff firmer than usual, when I saw innocence borne
down with violence. But why talk I what is true and just to thee, who
hast been a man of violence from thy youth upwards? Let me rather speak
to thee such language as thou canst comprehend. Deliver these young men
up to me,’ he said, when he had led Redgauntlet a little apart from the
crowd, ‘and I will not only free thee from the heavy charge of damages
which thou hast incurred by thine outrage upon my property, but I will
add ransom for them and for myself. What would it profit thee to do the
youths wrong, by detaining them in captivity?’

‘Mr. Geddes,’ said Redgauntlet, in a tone more respectful than he had
hitherto used to the Quaker, ‘your language is disinterested, and I
respect the fidelity of your friendship. Perhaps we have mistaken each
other’s principles and motives; but if so, we have not at present time
for explanation. Make yourself easy. I hope to raise your friend
Darsie Latimer to a pitch of eminence which you will witness with
pleasure;--nay, do not attempt to answer me. The other young man shall
suffer restraint a few days, probably only a few hours,--it is not more
than due for his pragmatical interference in what concerned him not.
Do you, Mr. Geddes, be so prudent as to take your horse and leave this
place, which is growing every moment more unfit for the abode of a man
of peace. You may wait the event in safety at Mount Sharon.’

‘Friend,’ replied Joshua, ‘I cannot comply with thy advice; I will
remain here, even as thy prisoner, as thou didst but now threaten,
rather than leave the youth who hath suffered by and through me and my
misfortunes, in his present state of doubtful safety. Wherefore I will
not mount my steed Solomon; neither will I turn his head towards Mount
Sharon, until I see an end of this matter.’

‘A prisoner, then, you must be,’ said Redgauntlet. ‘I have no time to
dispute the matter further with you. But tell me for what you fix your
eyes so attentively on yonder people of mine.’

‘To speak the truth,’ said the Quaker, ‘I admire to behold among them
a little wretch of a boy called Benjie, to whom I think Satan has given
the power of transporting himself wheresoever mischief is going forward;
so that it may be truly said, there is no evil in this land wherein he
hath not a finger, if not a whole hand.’

The boy, who saw their eyes fixed on him as they spoke, seemed
embarrassed, slid rather desirous of making his escape; but at a signal
from Redgauntlet he advanced, assuming the sheepish look and rustic
manner with which the jackanapes covered much acuteness and roguery.

‘How long have you been with the party, sirrah?’ said Redgauntlet.

‘Since the raid on the stake-nets,’ said Benjie, with his finger in his
mouth.

‘And what made you follow us?’

‘I dauredna stay at hame for the constables,’ replied the boy.

‘And what have you been doing all this time?’

‘Doing, sir? I dinna ken what ye ca’ doing--I have been doing naething,’
said Benjie; then seeing something in Redgauntlet’s eye which was not
to be trifled with, he added, ‘Naething but waiting on Maister Cristal
Nixon.’

‘Hum!--aye--indeed?’ muttered Redgauntlet. ‘Must Master Nixon bring his
own retinue into the field? This must be seen to.’

He was about to pursue his inquiry, when Nixon himself came to him with
looks of anxious haste, ‘The Father is come,’ he whispered, ‘and the
gentlemen are getting together in the largest room of the house, and
they desire to see you. Yonder is your nephew, too, making a noise like
a man in Bedlam.’

‘I will look to it all instantly,’ said Redgauntlet. ‘Is the Father
lodged as I directed?’

Cristal nodded.

‘Now, then, for the final trial,’ said Redgauntlet. He folded his
hands--looked upwards--crossed himself--and after this act of devotion
(almost the first which any one had observed him make use of) he
commanded Nixon to keep good watch--have his horses and men ready for
every emergence--look after the safe custody of the prisoners--but treat
them at the same time well and civilly. And, these orders given, he
darted hastily into the house.





NARRATIVE CONTINUED

Redgauntlet’s first course was to the chamber of his nephew. He unlocked
the door, entered the apartment, and asked what he wanted, that he made
so much noise.

‘I want my liberty,’ said Darsie, who had wrought himself up to a pitch
of passion in which his uncle’s wrath had lost its terrors. ‘I desire
my liberty, and to be assured of the safety of my beloved friend, Alan
Fairford, whose voice I heard but now.’

‘Your liberty shall be your own within half an hour from this
period--your friend shall be also set at freedom in due time--and you
yourself be permitted to have access to his place of confinement.’

‘This does not satisfy me,’ said Darsie; ‘I must see my friend
instantly; he is here, and he is here endangered on my account only--I
have heard violent exclamations--the clash of swords. You will gain no
point with me unless I have ocular demonstration of his safety.’

‘Arthur--dearest nephew,’ answered Redgauntlet, ‘drive me not mad! Thine
own fate--that of thy house--that of thousands--that of Britain herself,
are at this moment in the scales; and you are only occupied about the
safety of a poor insignificant pettifogger!’

‘He has sustained injury at your hands, then?’ said Darsie, fiercely. ‘I
know he has; but if so, not even our relationship shall protect you.’

‘Peace, ungrateful and obstinate fool!’ said Redgauntlet. Yet
stay--will you be satisfied if you see this Alan Fairford, the bundle
of bombazine--this precious friend of yours--well and sound? Will you,
I say, be satisfied with seeing him in perfect safety without attempting
to speak to or converse with him?’ Darsie signified his assent. ‘Take
hold of my arm, then,’ said Redgauntlet; ‘and do you, niece Lilias, take
the other; and beware; Sir Arthur, how you bear yourself.’

Darsie was compelled to acquiesce, sufficiently aware that his uncle
would permit him no interview with a friend whose influence would
certainly be used against his present earnest wishes, and in some
measure contented with the assurance of Fairford’s personal safety.

Redgauntlet led them through one or two passages (for the house, as
we have before said, was very irregular, and built at different times)
until they entered an apartment, where a man with shouldered carabine
kept watch at the door, but readily turned the key for their reception.
In this room they found Alan Fairford and the Quaker, apparently in
deep conversation with each other. They looked up as Redgauntlet and
his party entered; and Alan pulled off his hat and made a profound
reverence, which the young lady, who recognized him,--though, masked
as she was, he could not know her,--returned with some embarrassment,
arising probably from the recollection of the bold step she had taken in
visiting him.

Darsie longed to speak, but dared not. His uncle only said, ‘Gentlemen,
I know you are as anxious on Mr. Darsie Latimer’s account as he is upon
yours. I am commissioned by him to inform you, that he is as well as you
are--I trust you will all meet soon. Meantime, although I cannot suffer
you to be at large, you shall be as well treated as is possible under
your temporary confinement.’

He passed on, without pausing to hear the answers which the lawyer and
the Quaker were hastening to prefer; and only waving his hand by way
of adieu, made his exit, with the real and the seeming lady whom he
had under his charge, through a door at the upper end of the apartment,
which was fastened and guarded like that by which they entered.

Redgauntlet next led the way into a very small room; adjoining which,
but divided by a partition, was one of apparently larger dimensions; for
they heard the trampling of the heavy boots of the period, as if several
persons were walking to and fro and conversing in low and anxious
whispers.

‘Here,’ said Redgauntlet to his nephew, as he disencumbered him from
the riding-skirt and the mask, ‘I restore you to yourself, and trust you
will lay aside all effeminate thoughts with this feminine dress. Do
not blush at having worn a disguise to which kings and heroes have been
reduced. It is when female craft or female cowardice find their way
into a manly bosom, that he who entertains these sentiments should take
eternal shame to himself for thus having resembled womankind. Follow me,
while Lilias remains here. I will introduce you to those whom I hope to
see associated with you in the most glorious cause that hand ever drew
sword in.’

Darsie paused. ‘Uncle,’ he said, ‘my person is in your hands; but
remember, my will is my own. I will not be hurried into any resolution
of importance. Remember what I have already said--what I now
repeat--that I will take no step of importance but upon conviction.’

‘But canst thou be convinced, thou foolish boy, without hearing and
understanding the grounds on which we act?’

So saying he took Darsie by the arm, and walked with him to the next
room--a large apartment, partly filled with miscellaneous articles of
commerce, chiefly connected with contraband trade; where, among bales
and barrels, sat, or walked to and fro, several gentlemen, whose manners
and looks seemed superior to the plain riding dresses which they wore.

There was a grave and stern anxiety upon their countenances, when, on
Redgauntlet’s entrance, they drew from their separate coteries into one
group around him, and saluted him with a formality which had something
in it of ominous melancholy. As Darsie looked around the circle, he
thought he could discern in it few traces of that adventurous hope which
urges men upon desperate enterprises; and began to believe that the
conspiracy would dissolve of itself, without the necessity of his
placing himself in direct opposition to so violent a character as his
uncle, and incurring the hazard with which such opposition must be
attended.

Mr. Redgauntlet, however, did not, or would not, see any such marks of
depression of spirit amongst his coadjutors, but met them with cheerful
countenance, and a warm greeting of welcome. ‘Happy to meet you here,
my lord,’ he said, bowing low to a slender young man. ‘I trust you
come with the pledges of your noble father, of B--, and all that loyal
house.--Sir Richard, what news in the west? I am told you had two
hundred men on foot to have joined when the fatal retreat from Derby was
commenced. When the White Standard is again displayed, it shall not
be turned back so easily, either by the force of its enemies, or the
falsehood of its friends.--Doctor Grumball, I bow to the representative
of Oxford, the mother of learning and loyalty.--Pengwinion, you
Cornish chough, has this good wind blown you north?--Ah, my brave
Cambro-Britons, when was Wales last in the race of honour?’

Such and such-like compliments he dealt around, which were in general
answered by silent bows; but when he saluted one of his own countrymen
by the name of MacKellar, and greeted Maxwell of Summertrees by that
of Pate-in-Peril, the latter replied, ‘that if Pate were not a fool,
he would be Pate-in-Safety;’ and the former, a thin old gentle-man, in
tarnished embroidery, said bluntly, ‘Aye, troth, Redgauntlet, I am here
just like yourself; I have little to lose--they that took my land the
last time, may take my life this; and that is all I care about it.’

The English gentlemen, who were still in possession of their paternal
estates, looked doubtfully on each other, and there was something
whispered among them of the fox which had lost his tail.

Redgauntlet hastened to address them. ‘I think, my lords and gentlemen,’
he said, ‘that I can account for something like sadness which has crept
upon an assembly gathered together for so noble a purpose. Our numbers
seem, when thus assembled, too small and inconsiderable to shake the
firm-seated usurpation of a half-century. But do not count us by what
we are in thew and muscle, but by what our summons can do among our
countrymen. In this small party are those who have power to raise
battalions, and those who have wealth to pay them. And do not believe
our friends who are absent are cold or indifferent to the cause. Let us
once light the signal, and it will be hailed by all who retain love for
the Stuart, and by all--a more numerous body--who hate the Elector. Here
I have letters from’--

Sir Richard Glendale interrupted the speaker. ‘We all confide,
Redgauntlet, in your valour and skill--we admire your perseverance; and
probably nothing short of your strenuous exertions, and the emulation
awakened by your noble and disinterested conduct, could have brought
so many of us, the scattered remnant of a disheartened party, to meet
together once again in solemn consultation; for I take it, gentlemen,’
he said, looking round, ‘this is only a consultation.’

‘Nothing more,’ said the young lord.

‘Nothing more,’ said Doctor Grumball, shaking his large academical
peruke.

And, ‘Only a consultation,’ was echoed by the others.

Redgauntlet bit his lip. ‘I had hopes,’ he said, ‘that the discourses
I have held with most of you, from time to time, had ripened into more
maturity than your words imply, and that we were here to execute as
well as to deliberate; and for this we stand prepared. I can raise five
hundred men with my whistle.’

‘Five hundred men!’ said one of the Welsh squires; ‘Cot bless us! and
pray you, what cood could five hundred men do?’

‘All that the priming does for the cannon, Mr. Meredith,’ answered
Redgauntlet; ‘it will enable us to seize Carlisle, and you know what our
friends have engaged for in that case.’

‘Yes--but,’ said the young nobleman, ‘you must not hurry us on too fast,
Mr. Redgauntlet; we are all, I believe, as sincere and truehearted in
this business as you are, but we will not be driven forward blindfold.
We owe caution to ourselves and our families, as well as to those whom
we are empowered to represent on this occasion.’

‘Who hurries you, my lord? Who is it that would drive this meeting
forward blindfold? I do not understand your lordship,’ said Redgauntlet.

‘Nay,’ said Sir Richard Glendale, ‘at least do not let us fall under
our old reproach of disagreeing among ourselves. What my lord means,
Redgauntlet, is, that we have this morning heard it is uncertain
whether you could even bring that body of men whom you count upon; your
countryman, Mr. MacKellar, seemed, just before you came in, to doubt
whether your people would rise in any force, unless you could produce
the authority of your nephew.’

‘I might ask,’ said Redgauntlet,’ what right MacKellar, or any one, has
to doubt my being able to accomplish what I stand pledged for? But our
hopes consist in our unity. Here stands my nephew. Gentlemen, I present
to you my kinsman, Sir Arthur Darsie Redgauntlet of that Ilk.’

‘Gentlemen,’ said Darsie, with a throbbing bosom, for he felt the crisis
a very painful one, ‘Allow me to say, that I suspend expressing my
sentiments on the important subject under discussion until I have heard
those of the present meeting.’

‘Proceed in your deliberations, gentlemen,’ said Redgauntlet; ‘I will
show my nephew such reasons for acquiescing in the result, as will
entirely remove any scruples which may hang around his mind.’

Dr. Grumball now coughed, ‘shook his ambrosial curls,’ and addressed the
assembly.

‘The principles of Oxford,’ he said,’ are well understood, since she
was the last to resign herself to the Arch-Usurper,--since she has
condemned, by her sovereign authority, the blasphemous, atheistical,
and anarchical tenets of Locke, and other deluders of the public
mind. Oxford will give men, money and countenance, to the cause of the
rightful monarch. But we have, been often deluded by foreign powers,
who have availed themselves of our zeal to stir up civil dissensions, in
Britain, not for the advantage of our blessed though banished monarch,
but to stir up disturbances by which they might profit, while we, their
tools, are sure to be ruined. Oxford, therefore, will not rise, unless
our sovereign comes in person to claim our allegiance, in which case,
God forbid we should refuse him our best obedience.’

‘It is a very cood advice,’ said Mr. Meredith.

‘In troth,’ said Sir Richard Glendale, ‘it is the very keystone of our
enterprise, and the only condition upon which I myself and others
could ever have dreamt of taking up arms. No insurrection which has not
Charles Edward himself at its head, will, ever last longer than till a
single foot company of redcoats march to disperse it.’

‘This is my own opinion, and that of all my family,’ said the young
nobleman already mentioned; ‘and I own I am somewhat surprised at being
summoned to attend a dangerous rendezvous such as this, before something
certain could have been stated to us on this most important preliminary
point.’

‘Pardon me, my lord,’ said Redgauntlet; ‘I have not been so unjust
either to myself or my friends--I had no means of communicating to our
distant confederates (without the greatest risk of discovery) what is
known to some of my honourable friends. As courageous, and as resolved,
as when, twenty years since, he threw himself into the wilds of Moidart,
Charles Edward has instantly complied with the wishes of his faithful
subjects. Charles Edward is in this country--Charles Edward is in this
house!--Charles Edward waits but your present decision, to receive the
homage of those who have ever called themselves his loyal liegemen. He
that would now turn his coat, and change his note, must do so under the
eye of his sovereign.’

There was a deep pause. Those among the conspirators whom mere habit, or
a desire of preserving consistency, had engaged in the affair, now saw
with terror their retreat cut off; and others, who at a distance had
regarded the proposed enterprise as hopeful, trembled when the moment
of actually embarking in it was thus unexpectedly and almost inevitably
precipitated.

‘How now, my lords and gentlemen!’ said Redgauntlet; is it delight and
rapture that keep you thus silent? where are the eager welcomes that
should be paid to your rightful king, who a second time confides his
person to the care of his subjects, undeterred by the hairbreadth
escapes and severe privations of his former expedition? I hope there is
no gentleman here that is not ready to redeem, in his prince’s presence,
the pledge of fidelity which he offered in his absence.’

‘I, at least,’ said the young nobleman resolutely, and laying his hand
on his sword, ‘will not be that coward. If Charles is come to these
shores, I will be the first to give him welcome, and to devote my life
and fortune to his service.’

‘Before Cot,’ said Mr. Meredith, ‘I do not see that Mr. Redgauntlet has
left us anything else to do.’

‘Stay,’ said Summertrees, ‘there is yet one other question. Has he
brought any of those Irish rapparees with him, who broke the neck of our
last glorious affair?’

‘Not a man of them,’ said Redgauntlet.

‘I trust,’ said Dr. Grumball, ‘that there are no Catholic priests in his
company. I would not intrude on the private conscience of my sovereign,
but, as an unworthy son of the Church of England, it is my duty to
consider her security.’

‘Not a Popish dog or cat is there, to bark or mew about his Majesty,’
said Redgauntlet. ‘Old Shaftesbury himself could not wish a prince’s
person more secure from Popery--which may not be the worst religion
in the world, notwithstanding. Any more doubts, gentlemen? can no more
plausible reasons be discovered for postponing the payment of our duty,
and discharge of our oaths and engagements? Meantime your king waits
your declaration--by my faith he hath but a frozen reception!’

‘Redgauntlet,’ said Sir Richard Glendale, calmly, ‘your reproaches shall
not goad me into anything of which my reason disapproves. That I respect
my engagement as much as you do, is evident, since I am here, ready to
support it with the best blood in my veins. But has the king really come
hither entirely unattended?’

‘He has no man with him but young ------, as aide de camp, and a single
valet de chambre.’

‘No MAN--but, Redgauntlet, as you are a gentleman, has he no woman with
him?’

Redgauntlet cast his eyes on the ground and replied, ‘I am sorry to
say--he has.’

The company looked at each other, and remained silent for a moment.
At length Sir Richard proceeded. ‘I need not repeat to you, Mr.
Redgauntlet, what is the well-grounded opinion of his Majesty’s friends
concerning that most unhappy connexion there is but one sense and
feeling amongst us upon the subject. I must conclude that our humble
remonstrances were communicated by you, sir, to the king?’

‘In the same strong terms in which they were couched,’ replied
Redgauntlet. ‘I love his Majesty’s cause more than I fear his
displeasure.’

‘But, apparently, our humble expostulation has produced no effect.
This lady, who has crept into his bosom, has a sister in the Elector
of Hanover’s court, and yet we are well assured that our most private
communication is placed in her keeping.’

‘VARIUM ET MUTABILE SEMPER FEMINA,’ said Dr. Grumball.

‘She puts his secrets into her work-bag,’ said Maxwell; ‘and out they
fly whenever she opens it. If I must hang, I would wish it to be in
somewhat a better rope than the string of a lady’s hussey.’

‘Are you, too, turning dastard, Maxwell?’ said Redgauntlet, in a
whisper.

‘Not I,’ said Maxwell; ‘let us fight for it, and let them win and wear
us; but to be betrayed by a brimstone like that’--

‘Be temperate, gentlemen,’ said Redgauntlet; ‘the foible of which you
complain so heavily has always been that of kings and heroes; which I
feel strongly confident the king will surmount, upon the humble entreaty
of his best servants, and when he sees them ready to peril their all in
his cause, upon the slight condition of his resigning the society of
a female favourite, of whom I have seen reason to think he hath been
himself for some time wearied. But let us not press upon him rashly
with our well-meant zeal. He has a princely will as becomes his princely
birth, and we, gentlemen, who are royalists, should be the last to take
advantage of circumstances to limit its exercise. I am as much surprised
and hurt as you can be, to find that he has made her the companion of
this journey, increasing every chance of treachery and detection. But do
not let us insist upon a sacrifice so humiliating, while he has scarce
placed a foot upon the beach of his kingdom. Let us act generously by
our sovereign; and when we have shown what we will do for him, we
shall be able, with better face, to state what it is we expect him to
concede.’

‘Indeed, I think it is but a pity,’ said MacKellar, ‘when so many pretty
gentlemen are got together, that they should part without the flash of a
sword among them.’

‘I should be of that gentleman’s opinion,’ said Lord ------, ‘had I
nothing to lose but my life; but I frankly own, that the conditions
on which our family agreed to join having been, in this instance, left
unfulfilled, I will not peril the whole fortunes of our house on the
doubtful fidelity of an artful woman.’

‘I am sorry to see your lordship,’ said Redgauntlet, ‘take a course
which is more likely to secure your house’s wealth than to augment its
honours.’

‘How am I to understand your language, sir?’ said the young nobleman,
haughtily.

‘Nay, gentlemen,’ said Dr Grumball, interposing, ‘do not let friends
quarrel; we are all zealous for the cause--but truly, although I know
the license claimed by the great in such matters, and can, I hope, make
due allowance, there is, I may say, an indecorum in a prince who comes
to claim the allegiance of the Church of England, arriving on such an
errand with such a companion--SI NON CASTE, CAUTE TAMEN.’

‘I wonder how the Church of England came to be so heartily attached to
his merry old namesake,’ said Redgauntlet.

Sir Richard Glendale then took up the question, as one whose authority
and experience gave him right to speak with much weight.

‘We have no leisure for hesitation,’ he said; ‘it is full time that
we decide what course we are to hold. I feel as much as you, Mr.
Redgauntlet, the delicacy of capitulating with our sovereign in his
present condition. But I must also think of the total ruin of the
cause, the confiscation and bloodshed which will take place among his
adherents, and all through the infatuation with which he adheres to
a woman who is the pensionary of the present minister, as she was
for years Sir Robert Walpole’s. Let his Majesty send her back to the
continent, and the sword on which I now lay my hand shall instantly be
unsheathed, and, I trust, many hundred others at the same moment.’

The other persons present testified their unanimous acquiescence in what
Sir Richard Glendale had said.

‘I see you have taken your resolutions, gentlemen,’ said Redgauntlet;
‘unwisely I think, because I believe that, by softer and more generous
proceedings, you would have been more likely to carry a point which I
think as desirable as you do. But what is to be done if Charles should
refuse, with the inflexibility of his grandfather, to comply with this
request of yours? Do you mean to abandon him to his fate?’

‘God forbid!’ said Sir Richard, hastily; ‘and God forgive you, Mr.
Redgauntlet, for breathing such a thought. No! I for one will, with all
duty and humility, see him safe back to his vessel, and defend him with
my life against whosoever shall assail him. But when I have seen his
sails spread, my next act will be to secure, if I can, my own safety, by
retiring to my house; or, if I find our engagement, as is too probable,
has taken wind, by surrendering myself to the next Justice of Peace,
and giving security that hereafter I shall live quiet, and submit to the
ruling powers.’

Again the rest of the persons present intimated their agreement in
opinion with the speaker.

‘Well, gentlemen,’ said Redgauntlet, ‘it is not for me to oppose the
opinion of every one; and I must do you the justice to say, that
the king has, in the present instance, neglected a condition of your
agreement which was laid before him in very distinct terms. The question
now is, who is to acquaint him with the result of this conference; for I
presume you would not wait on him in a body to make the proposal that
he should dismiss a person from his family as the price of your
allegiance.’

‘I think Mr. Redgauntlet should make the explanation, said Lord--. ‘As
he has, doubtless, done justice to our remonstrances by communicating
them to the king, no one can, with such propriety and force, state the
natural and inevitable consequence of their being neglected.’

‘Now, I think,’ said Redgauntlet, ‘that those who make the objection
should state it, for I am confident the king will hardly believe, on
less authority than that of the heir of the loyal House of B--, that he
is the first to seek an evasion of his pledge to join him.’

‘An evasion, sir!’ repeated Lord ------, fiercely, ‘I have borne too
much from you already, and this I will not endure. Favour me with your
company to the downs.’

Redgauntlet laughed scornfully, and was about to follow the fiery young
man, when Sir Richard again interposed. ‘Are we to exhibit,’ he said,
‘the last symptoms of the dissolution of our party, by turning our
swords against each other? Be patient, Lord ------; in such conferences
as this, much must pass unquestioned which might brook challenge
elsewhere. There is a privilege of party as of parliament--men cannot,
in emergency, stand upon picking phrases. Gentlemen, if you will extend
your confidence in me so far, I will wait upon his Majesty, and I
hope my Lord ------ and Mr. Redgauntlet will accompany me. I trust the
explanation of this unpleasant matter will prove entirely satisfactory,
and that we shall find ourselves at liberty to render our homage to our
sovereign without reserve, when I for one will be the first to peril all
in his just quarrel.’

Redgauntlet at once stepped forward. ‘My lord,’ he said, ‘if my zeal
made me say anything in the slightest degree offensive, I wish it
unsaid, and ask your pardon. A gentleman can do no more.’

‘I could not have asked Mr. Redgauntlet to do so much,’ said the young
nobleman, willingly accepting the hand which Redgauntlet offered. ‘I
know no man living from whom I could take so much reproof without a
sense of degradation as from himself.’

‘Let me then hope, my lord, that you will go with Sir Richard and me to
the presence. Your warm blood will heat our zeal--our colder resolves
will temper yours.

The young lord smiled, and shook his head. ‘Alas! Mr. Redgauntlet,’ he
said, ‘I am ashamed to say, that in zeal you surpass us all. But I
will not refuse this mission, provided you will permit Sir Arthur, your
nephew, also to accompany us.’

‘My nephew?’ said Redgauntlet, and seemed to hesitate, then added, ‘Most
certainly. I trust,’ he said, looking at Darsie, ‘he will bring to his
prince’s presence such sentiments as fit the occasion.’

It seemed however to Darsie, that his uncle would rather have left
him behind, had he not feared that he might in that case have been
influenced by, or might perhaps himself influence, the unresolved
confederates with whom he must have associated during his absence.

‘I will go,’ said Redgauntlet, ‘and request admission.’

In a moment after he returned, and without speaking, motioned for the
young nobleman to advance. He did so, followed by Sir Richard Glendale
and Darsie, Redgauntlet himself bringing up the rear. A short
passage, and a few steps, brought them to the door of the temporary
presence-chamber, in which the Royal Wanderer was to receive their
homage. It was the upper loft of one of those cottages which made
additions to the old inn, poorly furnished, dusty, and in disorder; for,
rash as the enterprise might be considered, they had been still careful
not to draw the attention of strangers by any particular attentions
to the personal accommodation of the prince. He was seated, when the
deputies, as they might be termed, of his remaining adherents entered;
and as he rose, and came forward and bowed, in acceptance of their
salutation, it was with a dignified courtesy which at once supplied
whatever was deficient in external pomp, and converted the wretched
garret into a saloon worthy of the occasion.

It is needless to add that he was the same personage already introduced
in the character of Father Buonaventure, by which name he was
distinguished at Fairladies. His dress was not different from what he
then wore, excepting that he had a loose riding-coat of camlet, under
which he carried an efficient cut-and-thrust sword, instead of his
walking rapier, and also a pair of pistols.

Redgauntlet presented to him successively the young Lord ------, and
his kinsman, Sir Arthur Darsie Redgauntlet, who trembled as, bowing
and kissing his hand, he found himself surprised into what might be
construed an act of high treason, which yet he saw no safe means to
avoid.

Sir Richard Glendale seemed personally known to Charles Edward, who
received him with a mixture of dignity and affection, and seemed to
sympathize with the tears which rushed into that gentleman’s eyes as he
bade his Majesty welcome to his native kingdom.

‘Yes, my good Sir Richard,’ said the unfortunate prince in a tone
melancholy, yet resolved, ‘Charles Edward is with his faithful friends
once more--not, perhaps, with his former gay hopes which undervalued
danger, but with the same determined contempt of the worst which can
befall him, in claiming his own rights and those of his country.’

‘I rejoice, sire--and yet, alas! I must also grieve, to see you once
more on the British shores,’ said Sir Richard Glendale, and stopped
short--a tumult of contradictory feelings preventing his further
utterance.

‘It is the call of my faithful and suffering people which alone could
have induced me to take once more the sword in my hand. For my own part,
Sir Richard, when I have reflected how many of my loyal and devoted
friends perished by the sword and by proscription, or died indigent
and neglected in a foreign land, I have often, sworn that no view to my
personal aggrandizement should again induce me to agitate a title which
has cost my followers so dear. But since so many men of worth and honour
conceive the cause of England and Scotland to be linked with that of
Charles Stuart, I must follow their brave example, and, laying aside all
other considerations, once more stand forward as their deliverer. I am,
however, come hither upon your invitation; and as you are so completely
acquainted with circumstances to which my absence must necessarily
have rendered me a stranger, I must be a mere tool in the hands of my
friends. I know well I never can refer myself implicitly to more
loyal hearts or wiser heads, than Herries Redgauntlet, and Sir Richard
Glendale. Give me your advice, then, how we are to proceed, and decide
upon the fate of Charles Edward.’

Redgauntlet looked at Sir Richard, as if to say, ‘Can you press any
additional or unpleasant condition at a moment like this?’ And the other
shook his head and looked down, as if his resolution was unaltered, and
yet as feeling all the delicacy of the situation.

There was a silence, which was broken by the unfortunate representative
of an unhappy dynasty, with some appearance of irritation. ‘This is
strange, gentlemen,’ he said; ‘you have sent for me from the bosom of my
family, to head an adventure of doubt and danger; and when I come, your
own minds seem to be still irresolute. I had not expected this on the
part of two such men.’

‘For me, sire,’ said Redgauntlet, ‘the steel of my sword is not truer
than the temper of my mind.’

‘My Lord ------‘s and mine are equally so,’ said Sir Richard; ‘but you
had in charge, Mr. Redgauntlet, to convey our request to his Majesty,
coupled with certain conditions.’

‘And I discharged my duty to his Majesty and to you,’ said Redgauntlet.

‘I looked at no condition, gentlemen,’ said their king, with dignity,’
save that which called me here to assert my rights in person. That I
have fulfilled at no common risk. Here I stand to keep my word, and I
expect of you to be true to yours.’

‘There was, or should have been, something more than that in our
proposal, please your Majesty,’ said Sir Richard. ‘There was a condition
annexed to it.’

‘I saw it not,’ said Charles, interrupting him. ‘Out of tenderness
towards the noble hearts of whom I think so highly, I would neither
see nor read anything which could lessen them in my love and my esteem.
Conditions can have no part betwixt prince and subject.’

‘Sire,’ said Redgauntlet, kneeling on one knee, ‘I see from Sir
Richard’s countenance he deems it my fault that your Majesty seems
ignorant of what your subjects desired that I should communicate to your
Majesty. For Heaven’s sake! for the sake of all my past services and
sufferings, leave not such a stain upon my honour! The note, Number D,
of which this is a copy, referred to the painful subject to which Sir
Richard again directs your attention.’

‘You press upon me, gentlemen,’ said the prince, colouring highly,’
recollections, which, as I hold them most alien to your character, I
would willingly have banished from my memory. I did not suppose that
my loyal subjects would think so poorly of me, as to use my depressed
circumstances as a reason for forcing themselves into my domestic
privacies, and stipulating arrangements with their king regarding
matters in which the meanest minds claim the privilege of thinking for
themselves. In affairs of state and public policy, I will ever be guided
as becomes a prince, by the advice of my wisest counsellors; in those
which regard my private affections and my domestic arrangements, I claim
the same freedom of will which I allow to all my subjects, and without
which a crown were less worth wearing than a beggar’s bonnet.’

‘May it please your Majesty,’ said Sir Richard Glendale, ‘I see it must
be my lot to speak unwilling truths; but believe me, I do so with as
much profound respect as deep regret. It is true, we have called you to
head a mighty undertaking, and that your Majesty, preferring honour to
safety, and the love of your country to your own ease, has condescended
to become our leader. But we also pointed out as a necessary and
indispensable preparatory step to the achievement of our purpose--and,
I must say, as a positive condition of our engaging in it--that an
individual, supposed,--I presume not to guess how truly,--to have your
Majesty’s more intimate confidence, and believed, I will not say on
absolute proof but upon the most pregnant suspicion, to be capable of
betraying that confidence to the Elector of Hanover, should be removed
from your royal household and society.’

‘This is too insolent, Sir Richard!’ said Charles Edward. ‘Have you
inveigled me into your power to bait me in this unseemly manner? And
you, Redgauntlet, why did you suffer matters to come to such a point as
this, without making me more distinctly aware what insults were to be
practised on me?’

‘My gracious prince,’ said Redgauntlet, ‘I am so far to blame in this,
that I did not think so slight an impediment as that of a woman’s
society could have really interrupted an undertaking of this magnitude.
I am a plain man, sire, and speak but bluntly; I could not have dreamt
but what, within the first five minutes of this interview, either Sir
Richard and his friends would have ceased to insist upon a condition so
ungrateful to your Majesty, or that your Majesty would have sacrificed
this unhappy attachment to the sound advice, or even to the over-anxious
suspicions, of so many faithful subjects. I saw no entanglement in such
a difficulty which on either side might not have been broken through
like a cobweb.’

‘You were mistaken, sir,’ said Charles Edward, ‘entirely mistaken--as
much so as you are at this moment, when you think in your heart my
refusal to comply with this insolent proposition is dictated by a
childish and romantic passion for an individual, I tell you, sir, I
could part with that person to-morrow, without an instant’s regret--that
I have had thoughts of dismissing her from my court, for reasons known
to myself; but that I will never betray my rights as a sovereign and a
man, by taking this step to secure the favour of any one, or to purchase
that allegiance which, if you owe it to me at all, is due to me as my
birthright.’

‘I am sorry for this,’ said Redgauntlet; ‘I hope both your Majesty
and Sir Richard will reconsider your resolutions, or forbear this
discussion, in a conjuncture so pressing. I trust your Majesty will
recollect that you are on hostile ground; that our preparations cannot
have so far escaped notice as to permit us now with safety to retreat
from our purpose; insomuch, that it is with the deepest anxiety of
heart I foresee even danger to your own royal person, unless you can
generously give your subjects the satisfaction, which Sir Richard seems
to think they are obstinate in demanding.’

‘And deep indeed your anxiety ought to be,’ said the prince. ‘Is it in
these circumstances of personal danger in which you expect to overcome a
resolution, which is founded on a sense of what is due to me as a man
or a prince? If the axe and scaffold were ready before the windows of
Whitehall, I would rather tread the same path with my great-grandfather,
than concede the slightest point in which my honour is concerned.’

He spoke these words with a determined accent, and looked around him on
the company, all of whom (excepting Darsie, who saw, he thought, a
fair period to a most perilous enterprise) seemed in deep anxiety and
confusion. At length, Sir Richard spoke in a solemn and melancholy tone.
‘If the safety,’ he said, ‘of poor Richard Glendale were alone concerned
in this matter, I have never valued my life enough to weigh it
against the slightest point of your Majesty’s service. But I am only a
messenger--a commissioner, who must execute my trust, and upon whom a
thousand voices will cry, Curse and woe, if I do it not with fidelity.
All of your adherents, even Redgauntlet himself, see certain ruin to
this enterprise--the greatest danger to your Majesty’s person--the utter
destruction of all your party and friends, if they insist not on the
point, which, unfortunately, your Majesty is so unwilling to concede. I
speak it with a heart full of anguish--with a tongue unable to utter
my emotions--but it must be spoken--the fatal truth--that if your
royal goodness cannot yield to us a boon which we hold necessary to our
security and your own, your Majesty with one word disarms ten thousand
men, ready to draw their swords in your behalf; or, to speak yet more
plainly, you annihilate even the semblance of a royal party in Great
Britain.’

‘And why do you not add,’ said the prince, scornfully, ‘that the men
who have been ready to assume arms in my behalf, will atone for their
treason to the Elector, by delivering me up to the fate for which so
many proclamations have destined me? Carry my head to St. James’s,
gentlemen; you will do a more acceptable and a more honourable action,
than, having inveigled me into a situation which places me so completely
in your power, to dishonour yourselves by propositions which dishonour
me.

‘My God, sire!’ exclaimed Sir Richard, clasping his hands together,
in impatience, ‘of what great and inexpiable crime can your Majesty’s
ancestors have ‘been guilty, that they have been punished by the
infliction of judicial blindness on their whole generation!--Come, my
Lord ------, we must to our friends.’

‘By your leave, Sir Richard,’ said the young nobleman, ‘not till we,
have learned what measures can be taken for his Majesty’s personal
safety.’

‘Care not for me, young man,’ said Charles Edward; ‘when I was in the
society of Highland robbers and cattle-drovers, I was safer than I now
hold myself among the representatives of the best blood in England.
Farewell, gentlemen--I will shift for myself.’

‘This must never be,’ said Redgauntlet. ‘Let me that brought you to the
point of danger, at least provide for your safe retreat.’

So saying, he hastily left the apartment, followed by his nephew. The
Wanderer, averting his eyes from Lord ------ and Sir Richard Glendale,
threw himself into a seat at the upper end of the apartment, while they,
in much anxiety, stood together, at a distance from him, and conversed
in whispers.





NARRATIVE CONTINUED

When Redgauntlet left the room, in haste and discomposure, the first
person he met on the stair, and indeed so close by the door of the
apartment that Darsie thought he must have been listening there, was his
attendant Nixon.

‘What the devil do you here?’ he said, abruptly and sternly.

‘I wait your orders,’ said Nixon. ‘I hope all’s right!--excuse my zeal.’

‘All is wrong, sir. Where is the seafaring fellow--Ewart--what do you
call him?’

‘Nanty Ewart, sir. I will carry your commands,’ said Nixon.

‘I will deliver them myself to him,’ said Redgauntlet; call him hither.’

‘But should your honour leave the presence?’ said Nixon, still
lingering.

‘‘Sdeath, sir, do you prate to me?’ said Redgauntlet, bending his brows.
‘I, sir, transact my own business; you, I am told, act by a ragged
deputy.’

Without further answer, Nixon departed, rather disconcerted, as it
seemed to Darsie.

‘That dog turns insolent and lazy,’ said Redgauntlet; but I must bear
with him for a while.’

A moment after, Nixon returned with Ewart.

‘Is this the smuggling fellow?’ demanded Redgauntlet. Nixon nodded.

‘Is he sober now? he was brawling anon.’

‘Sober enough for business,’ said Nixon.

‘Well then, hark ye, Ewart;--man your boat with your best hands, and
have her by the pier--get your other fellows on board the brig--if you
have any cargo left, throw it overboard; it shall be all paid, five
times over--and be ready for a start to Wales or the Hebrides, or
perhaps for Sweden or Norway.’

Ewart answered sullenly enough, ‘Aye, aye, sir.’

‘Go with him, Nixon,’ said Redgauntlet, forcing himself to speak with
some appearance of cordiality to the servant with whom he was offended;
‘see he does his duty.’

Ewart left the house sullenly, followed by Nixon. The sailor was just in
that species of drunken humour which made him jealous, passionate,
and troublesome, without showing any other disorder than that of
irritability. As he walked towards the beach he kept muttering to
himself, but in such a tone that his companion lost not a word,
‘Smuggling fellow--Aye, smuggler--and, start your cargo into the
sea--and be ready to start for the Hebrides, or Sweden--or the devil,
I suppose. Well, and what if I said in answer--Rebel, Jacobite--traitor;
I’ll make you and your d----d confederates walk the plank--I have seen
better men do it--half a score of a morning--when I was across the
Line.’

‘D--d unhandsome terms those Redgauntlet used to you, brother.’ said
Nixon.

‘Which do you mean?’ said Ewart, starting, and recollecting himself. ‘I
have been at my old trade of thinking aloud, have I?’

‘No matter,’ answered Nixon, ‘none but a friend heard you. You cannot
have forgotten how Redgauntlet disarmed you this morning.’

‘Why, I would bear no malice about that--only he is so cursedly high and
saucy,’ said Ewart.

‘And then,’ said Nixon, ‘I know you for a true-hearted Protestant.’

‘That I am, by G--,’ said Ewart. ‘No, the Spaniards could never get my
religion from me.’

‘And a friend to King George, and the Hanover line of succession,’ said
Nixon, still walking and speaking very slow.

‘You may swear I am, excepting in the way of business, as Turnpenny
says. I like King George, but I can’t afford to pay duties.’

‘You are outlawed, I believe,’ said Nixon.

‘Am I?--faith, I believe I am,’ said Ewart. ‘I wish I were INLAWED
again with all my heart. But come along, we must get all ready for our
peremptory gentleman, I suppose.’

‘I will teach you a better trick,’ said Nixon. ‘There is a bloody pack
of rebels yonder.’

‘Aye, we all know that,’ said the smuggler; ‘but the snowball’s melting,
I think.’

‘There is some one yonder, whose head is worth--thirty
thousand--pounds--of sterling money,’ said Nixon, pausing between each
word, as if to enforce the magnificence of the sum.

‘And what of that?’ said Ewart, quickly.

‘Only that, instead of lying by the pier with your men on their oars, if
you will just carry your boat on board just now, and take no notice of
any signal from the shore, by G--d, Nanty Ewart. I will make a man of
you for life!’

‘Oh ho! then the Jacobite gentry are not so safe as they think
themselves?’ said Nanty.

‘In an hour or two,’ replied Nixon, ‘they will be made safer in Carlisle
Castle.’

‘The devil they will!’ said Ewart; ‘and you have been the informer, I
suppose?’

‘Yes; I have been ill paid for my service among the Redgauntlets--have
scarce got dog’s wages--and been treated worse than ever dog was used. I
have the old fox and his cubs in the same trap now, Nanty; and we’ll see
how a certain young lady will look then. You see I am frank with you,
Nanty.’

‘And I will be as frank with you,’ said the smuggler. ‘You are a d--d
old scoundrel--traitor to the man whose bread you eat! Me help to betray
poor devils, that have been so often betrayed myself! Not if they were
a hundred Popes, Devils, and Pretenders. I will back and tell them their
danger--they are part of cargo--regularly invoiced--put under my charge
by the owners--I’ll back’--

‘You are not stark mad?’ said Nixon, who now saw he had miscalculated in
supposing Nanty’s wild ideas of honour and fidelity could be shaken
even by resentment, or by his Protestant partialities. ‘You shall not go
back--it is all a joke.’

‘I’ll back to Redgauntlet, and see whether it is a joke he will laugh
at.’

‘My life is lost if you do,’ said Nixon--‘hear reason.’

They were in a clump or cluster of tall furze at the moment they were
speaking, about half-way between the pier and the house, but not in a
direct line, from which Nixon, whose object it was to gain time, had
induced Ewart to diverge insensibly.

He now saw the necessity of taking a desperate resolution. ‘Hear
reason,’ he said; and added, as Nanty still endeavoured to pass him, ‘Or
else hear this!’ discharging a pocket-pistol into the unfortunate man’s
body.

Nanty staggered, but kept his feet. ‘It has cut my back-bone asunder,’
he said; ‘you have done me the last good office, and I will not die
ungrateful.’

As he uttered the last words, he collected his remaining strength, stood
firm for an instant, drew his hanger, and, fetching a stroke with both
hands, cut Cristal Nixon down. The blow, struck with all the energy of
a desperate and dying man, exhibited a force to which Ewart’s exhausted
frame might have seemed inadequate;--it cleft the hat which the wretch
wore, though secured by a plate of iron within the lining, bit deep into
his skull, and there left a fragment of the weapon, which was broke by
the fury of the blow.

One of the seamen of the lugger, who strolled up attracted by the firing
of the pistol, though being a small one the report was very trifling,
found both the unfortunate men stark dead. Alarmed at what he saw,
which he conceived to have been the consequence of some unsuccessful
engagement betwixt his late commander and a revenue officer (for Nixon
chanced not to be personally known to him) the sailor hastened back
to the boat, in order to apprise his comrades of Nanty’s fate, and to
advise them to take off themselves and the vessel.

Meantime Redgauntlet, having, as we have seen, dispatched Nixon for the
purpose of securing a retreat for the unfortunate Charles, in case of
extremity, returned to the apartment where he had left the Wanderer. He
now found him alone.

‘Sir Richard Glendale,’ said the unfortunate prince, ‘with his
young friend, has gone to consult their adherents now in the house.
Redgauntlet, my friend, I will not blame you for the circumstances in
which I find myself, though I am at once placed in danger, and rendered
contemptible. But you ought to have stated to me more strongly the
weight which these gentlemen attached to their insolent proposition. You
should have told me that no compromise would have any effect--that they
desire not a prince to govern them, but one, on the contrary, over
whom they were to exercise restraint on all occasions, from the highest
affairs of the state, down to the most intimate and private concerns of
his own privacy, which the most ordinary men desire to keep secret and
sacred from interference.’

‘God knows,’ said Redgauntlet, in much agitation, ‘I acted for the best
when I pressed your Majesty to come hither--I never thought that your
Majesty, at such a crisis, would have scrupled, when a kingdom was in
view, to sacrifice an attachment, which’--

‘Peace, sir!’ said Charles; ‘it is not for you to estimate my feelings
upon such a subject.’

Redgauntlet coloured high, and bowed profoundly. ‘At least,’ he
resumed, ‘I hoped that some middle way might be found, and it shall--and
must.--Come with me, nephew. We will to these gentlemen, and I am
confident I will bring back heart-stirring tidings.’

‘I will do much to comply with them, Redgauntlet. I am loath, having
again set my foot on British land, to quit it without a blow for my
right. But this which they demand of me is a degradation, and compliance
is impossible.’

Redgauntlet, followed by his nephew, the unwilling spectator of this
extraordinary scene, left once more the apartment of the adventurous
Wanderer, and was met on the top of the stairs by Joe Crackenthorp.
‘Where are the other gentlemen?’ he said.

‘Yonder, in the west barrack,’ answered Joe; ‘but Master
Ingoldsby,’--that was the name by which Redgauntlet was most generally
known in Cumberland,--‘I wish to say to you that I must put yonder folk
together in one room.’

‘What folk?’ said Redgauntlet, impatiently.

‘Why, them prisoner stranger folk, as you bid Cristal Nixon look after.
Lord love you! this is a large house enow, but we cannot have separate
lock-ups for folk, as they have in Newgate or in Bedlam. Yonder’s a
mad beggar, that is to be a great man when he wins a lawsuit, Lord help
him!--Yonder’s a Quaker and a lawyer charged with a riot; and, ecod, I
must make one key and one lock keep them, for we are chokeful, and you
have sent off old Nixon that could have given one some help in this
confusion. Besides, they take up every one a room, and call for naughts
on earth,--excepting the old man, who calls lustily enough,--but he has
not a penny to pay shot.’

‘Do as thou wilt with them,’ said Redgauntlet, who had listened
impatiently to his statement; ‘so thou dost but keep them from getting
out and making some alarm in the country, I care not.’

‘A Quaker and a lawyer!’ said Darsie. ‘This must be Fairford and
Geddes.--Uncle, I must request of you’--

‘Nay, nephew,’ interrupted Redgauntlet, ‘this is no time for asking
questions. You shall yourself decide upon their fate in the course of an
hour--no harm whatever is designed them.’

So saying, he hurried towards the place where the Jacobite gentlemen
were holding their council, and Darsie followed him, in the hope that
the obstacle which had arisen to the prosecution of their desperate
adventure would prove insurmountable and spare him the necessity of a
dangerous and violent rupture with his uncle. The discussions among
them were very eager; the more daring part of the conspirators, who had
little but life to lose, being desirous to proceed at all hazards;
while the others, whom a sense of honour and a hesitation to disavow
long-cherished principles had brought forward, were perhaps not ill
satisfied to have a fair apology for declining an adventure, into which
they had entered with more of reluctance than zeal.

Meanwhile Joe Crackenthorp, availing himself of the hasty permission
attained from Redgauntlet, proceeded to assemble in one apartment
those whose safe custody had been thought necessary; and, without much
considering the propriety of the matter, he selected for the common
place of confinement, the room which Lilias had, since her brother’s
departure, occupied alone. It had a strong lock, and was double-hinged,
which probably led to the preference assigned to it, as a place of
security.

Into this, Joe, with little ceremony, and a good deal of noise,
introduced the Quaker and Fairford; the first descanting on the
immorality, the other on the illegality, of his proceedings; and he
turned a deaf ear both to the one and the other. Next he pushed in,
almost in headlong fashion, the unfortunate litigant, who, having made
some resistance at the threshold, had received a violent thrust
in consequence, and came rushing forward, like a ram in the act of
charging, with such impetus as must have carried him to the top of the
room, and struck the cocked hat which sat perched on the top of his
tow wig against Miss Redgauntlet’s person, had not the honest Quaker
interrupted his career by seizing him by the collar, and bringing him to
a stand. ‘Friend,’ said he, with the real good-breeding which so often
subsists independently of ceremony, ‘thou art no company for that young
person; she is, thou seest, frightened at our being so suddenly thrust
in hither; and although that be no fault of ours, yet it will become
us to behave civilly towards her. Wherefore come thou with me to this
window, and I will tell thee what it concerns thee to know.’

‘And what for should I no speak to the Leddy, friend?’ said Peter, who
was now about half seas over. ‘I have spoke to leddies before now, man.
What for should she be frightened at me? I am nae bogle, I ween. What
are ye pooin’ me that gate for? Ye will rive my coat, and I will have
a good action for having myself made SARTUM ATQUE TECTUM at your
expenses.’

Notwithstanding this threat, Mr. Geddes, whose muscles were as strong as
his judgement was sound and his temper sedate, led Poor Peter under the
sense of a control against which he could not struggle, to the farther
corner of the apartment, where, placing him, whether he would or no, in
a chair, he sat down beside him, and effectually prevented his annoying
the young lady, upon whom he had seemed bent upon conferring the
delights of his society.

If Peter had immediately recognized his counsel learned in the law, it
is probable that not even the benevolent efforts of the Quaker could
have kept him in a state of restraint; but Fairford’s back was turned
towards his client, whose optics, besides being somewhat dazzled with
ale and brandy, were speedily engaged in contemplating a half-crown
which Joshua held between his finger and his thumb, saying, at the
same time, ‘Friend, thou art indigent and improvident. This will, well
employed, procure thee sustentation of nature for more than a single
day; and I will bestow it on thee if thou wilt sit here and keep me
company; for neither thou nor I, friend, are fit company for ladies.’

‘Speak for yourself, friend,’ said Peter, scornfully; ‘I was ay kend to
be agreeable to the fair sex; and when I was in business I served the
ladies wi’ anither sort of decorum than Plainstanes, the d--d awkward
scoundrel! It was one of the articles of dittay between us.’

‘Well, but, friend,’ said the Quaker, who observed that the young lady
still seemed to fear Peter’s intrusion, ‘I wish to hear thee speak about
this great lawsuit of thine, which has been matter of such celebrity.’

‘Celebrity! Ye may swear that,’ said Peter, for the string was touched
to which his crazy imagination always vibrated. ‘And I dinna wonder
that folk that judge things by their outward grandeur, should think me
something worth their envying. It’s very true that it is grandeur upon
earth to hear ane’s name thunnered out along the long-arched roof of the
Outer House,--“Poor Peter Peebles against Plainstanes ET PER CONTRA;”
 a’ the best lawyers in the house fleeing like eagles to the prey; some
because they are in the cause, and some because they want to be thought
engaged (for there are tricks in other trades by selling muslins)--to
see the reporters mending their pens to take down the debate--the Lords
themselves pooin’ in their chairs, like folk sitting down to a gude
dinner, and crying on the clerks for parts and pendicles of the process,
who, puir bodies, can do little mair than cry on their closet-keepers
to help them. To see a’ this,’ continued Peter, in a tone of sustained
rapture, ‘and to ken that naething will be said or dune amang a’ thae
grand folk, for maybe the feck of three hours, saving what concerns you
and your business--Oh, man, nae wonder that ye judge this to be earthly
glory! And yet, neighbour, as I was saying, there be unco drawbacks--I
whiles think of my bit house, where dinner, and supper, and breakfast,
used to come without the crying for, just as if fairies had brought
it--and the gude bed at e’en--and the needfu’ penny in the pouch. And
then to see a’ ane’s warldly substance capering in the air in a pair of
weighbauks, now up, now down, as the breath of judge or counsel inclines
it for pursuer or defender,--troth, man, there are times I rue having
ever begun the plea wark, though, maybe, when ye consider the renown and
credit I have by it, ye will hardly believe what I am saying.’

‘Indeed, friend,’ said Joshua, with a sigh, ‘I am glad thou hast found
anything in the legal contention which compensates thee for poverty and
hunger; but I believe, were other human objects of ambition looked
upon as closely, their advantages would be found as chimerical as those
attending thy protracted litigation.’

‘But never mind, friend,’ said Peter, ‘I’ll tell you the exact state of
the conjunct processes, and make you sensible that I can bring mysell
round with a wet finger, now I have my finger and my thumb on this
loup-the-dike loon, the lad Fairford.’

Alan Fairford was in the act of speaking to the masked lady (for Miss
Redgauntlet had retained her riding vizard) endeavouring to assure her,
as he perceived her anxiety, of such protection as he could afford, when
his own name, pronounced in a loud tone, attracted his attention. He
looked round, and seeing Peter Peebles, as hastily turned to avoid his
notice, in which he succeeded, so earnest was Peter upon his colloquy
with one of the most respectable auditors whose attention he had ever
been able to engage. And by this little motion, momentary as it was,
Alan gained an unexpected advantage; for while he looked round, Miss
Lilias, I could never ascertain why, took the moment to adjust her mask,
and did it so awkwardly, that when her companion again turned his head,
he recognized as much of her features as authorized him to address her
as his fair client, and to press his offers of protection and assistance
with the boldness of a former acquaintance.

Lilias Redgauntlet withdrew the mask from her crimsoned cheek. ‘Mr.
Fairford,’ she said, in a voice almost inaudible, ‘you have the
character of a young gentleman of sense and generosity; but we have
already met in one situation which you must think singular; and I must
be exposed to misconstruction, at least, for my forwardness, were it not
in a cause in which my dearest affections were concerned.’

‘Any interest in my beloved friend Darsie Latimer,’ said Fairford,
stepping a little back, and putting a marked restraint upon his former
advances, ‘gives me a double right to be useful to’--He stopped short.

‘To his sister, your goodness would say,’ answered Lilias.

‘His sister, madam!’ replied Alan, in the extremity of
astonishment--‘Sister, I presume, in affection only?’

‘No, sir; my dear brother Darsie and I are connected by the bonds of
actual relationship; and I am not sorry to be the first to tell this to
the friend he most values.’

Fairford’s first thought was on the violent passion which Darsie had
expressed towards the fair unknown. ‘Good God!’ he exclaimed, ‘how did
he bear the discovery?’

‘With resignation, I hope,’ said Lilias, smiling. ‘A more accomplished
sister he might easily have come by, but scarcely could have found one
who could love him more than I do.’

‘I meant--I only meant to say,’ said the young counsellor, his presence
of mind failing him for an instant--‘that is, I meant to ask where
Darsie Latimer is at this moment.’

‘In this very house, and under the guardianship of his uncle, whom I
believe you knew as a visitor of your father, under the name of Mr.
Herries of Birrenswork.’

‘Let me hasten to him,’ said Fairford; ‘I have sought him through
difficulties and dangers--I must see him instantly.’

‘You forget you are a prisoner,’ said the young lady.

‘True--true; but I cannot be long detained--the cause alleged is too
ridiculous.’

‘Alas!’ said Lilias, ‘our fate--my brother’s and mine, at least--must
turn on the deliberations perhaps of less than an hour. For you, sir, I
believe and apprehend nothing; but some restraint; my uncle is neither
cruel nor unjust, though few will go further in the cause which he has
adopted.’

‘Which is that of the Pretend’--

‘For God’s sake speak lower!’ said Lilias, approaching her hand, as if
to stop him. ‘The word may cost you your life. You do not know--indeed
you do not--the terrors of the situation in which we at present stand,
and in which I fear you also are involved by your friendship for my
brother.’

‘I do not indeed know the particulars of our situation,’ said Fairford;
‘but, be the danger what it may, I shall not grudge my share of it
for the sake of my friend; or,’ he added, with more timidity, ‘of my
friend’s sister. Let me hope,’ he said, ‘my dear Miss Latimer, that
my presence may be of some use to you; and that it may be so, let
me entreat a share of your confidence, which I am conscious I have
otherwise no right to ask.’

He led her, as he spoke, towards the recess of the farther window of the
room, and observing to her that, unhappily, he was particularly exposed
to interruption from the mad old man whose entrance had alarmed her, he
disposed of Darsie Latimer’s riding-skirt, which had been left in the
apartment, over the back of two chairs, forming thus a sort of screen,
behind which he ensconced himself with the maiden of the green mantle;
feeling at the moment, that the danger in which he was placed was almost
compensated by the intelligence which permitted those feelings towards
her to revive, which justice to his friend had induced him to stifle in
the birth.

The relative situation of adviser and advised, of protector and
protected, is so peculiarly suited to the respective condition of man
and woman, that great progress towards intimacy is often made in very
short space; for the circumstances call for confidence on the part of
the gentleman, and forbid coyness on that of the lady, so that the usual
barriers against easy intercourse are at once thrown down.

Under these circumstances, securing themselves as far as possible from
observation, conversing in whispers, and seated in a corner, where they
were brought into so close contact that their faces nearly touched each
other, Fairford heard from Lilias Redgauntlet the history of her family,
particularly of her uncle; his views upon her brother, and the agony
which she felt, lest at that very moment he might succeed in engaging
Darsie in some desperate scheme, fatal to his fortune and perhaps to his
life.

Alan Fairford’s acute understanding instantly connected what he had
heard with the circumstances he had witnessed at Fairladies. His first
thought was, to attempt, at all risks, his instant escape, and procure
assistance powerful enough to crush, in the very cradle, a conspiracy of
such a determined character. This he did not consider as difficult; for,
though the door was guarded on the outside, the window, which was not
above ten feet from the ground, was open for escape, the common on which
it looked was unenclosed, and profusely covered with furze. There
would, he thought, be little difficulty in effecting his liberty, and in
concealing his course after he had gained it.

But Lilias exclaimed against this scheme. Her uncle, she said, was a man
who, in his moments of enthusiasm, knew neither remorse nor fear. He
was capable of visiting upon Darsie any injury which he might conceive
Fairford had rendered him--he was her near kinsman also, and not an
unkind one, and she deprecated any effort, even in her brother’s favour,
by which his life must be exposed to danger. Fairford himself remembered
Father Buonaventure, and made little question but that he was one of
the sons of the old Chevalier de Saint George; and with feelings which,
although contradictory of his public duty, can hardly be much censured,
his heart recoiled from being the agent by whom the last scion of such
a long line of Scottish princes should be rooted up. He then thought
of obtaining an audience, if possible, of this devoted person, and
explaining to him the utter hopelessness of his undertaking, which he
judged it likely that the ardour of his partisans might have concealed
from him. But he relinquished this design as soon as formed. He had no
doubt, that any light which he could throw on the state of the country,
would come too late to be serviceable to one who was always reported to
have his own full share of the hereditary obstinacy which had cost his
ancestors so dear, and who, in drawing the sword, must have thrown from
him the scabbard.

Lilias suggested the advice which, of all others, seemed most suited
to the occasion, that, yielding, namely, to the circumstances of their
situation, they should watch carefully when Darsie should obtain any
degree of freedom, and endeavour to open a communication with him, in
which case their joint flight might be effected, and without endangering
the safety of any one.

Their youthful deliberation had nearly fixed in this point, when
Fairford, who was listening to the low sweet whispering tones of Lilias
Redgauntlet, rendered yet more interesting by some slight touch of
foreign accent, was startled by a heavy hand which descended with full
weight on his shoulder, while the discordant voice of Peter Peebles, who
had at length broke loose from the well-meaning Quaker, exclaimed in the
ear of his truant counsel--‘Aha, lad! I think ye are catched--An’ so ye
are turned chamber-counsel, are ye? And ye have drawn up wi’ clients
in scarfs and hoods? But bide a wee, billie, and see if I dinna sort ye
when my petition and complaint comes to be discussed, with or without
answers, under certification.’

Alan Fairford had never more difficulty in his life to subdue a first
emotion, than he had to refrain from knocking down the crazy blockhead
who had broken in upon him at such a moment. But the length of Peter’s
address gave him time, fortunately perhaps for both parties, to reflect
on the extreme irregularity of such a proceeding. He stood silent,
however, with vexation, while Peter went on.

‘Weel, my bonnie man, I see ye are thinking shame o’ yoursell, and nae
great wonder. Ye maun leave this quean--the like of her is ower light
company for you. I have heard honest Mr. Pest say, that the gown grees
ill wi’ the petticoat. But come awa hame to your puir father, and I’ll
take care of you the haill gate, and keep you company, and deil a word
we will speak about, but just the state of the conjoined processes of
the great cause of Poor Peter Peebles against Plainstanes.’

‘If thou canst; endure to hear as much of that suit, friend,’ said
the Quaker, ‘as I have heard out of mere compassion for thee, I think
verily thou wilt soon be at the bottom of the matter, unless it be
altogether bottomless.’

Fairford shook off, rather indignantly, the large bony hand which Peter
had imposed upon his shoulder, and was about to say something peevish,
upon so unpleasant and insolent a mode of interruption, when the door
opened, a treble voice saying to the sentinel, ‘I tell you I maun be in,
to see if Mr. Nixon’s here;’ and little Benjie thrust in his mop-head
and keen black eyes. Ere he could withdraw it, Peter Peebles sprang to
the door, seized on the boy by the collar, and dragged him forward into
the room.

‘Let me see it,’ he said, ‘ye ne’er-do-weel limb of Satan--I’ll gar
you satisfy the production, I trow--I’ll hae first and second diligence
against you, ye deevil’s buckie!’

‘What dost thou want?’ said the Quaker, interfering; ‘why dost thou
frighten the boy, friend Peebles?’

‘I gave the bastard a penny to buy me snuff,’ said the pauper, ‘and he
has rendered no account of his intromissions; but I’ll gar him as gude.’

So saying, he proceeded forcibly to rifle the pockets of Benjie’s ragged
jacket of one or two snares for game, marbles, a half-bitten apple, two
stolen eggs (one of which Peter broke in the eagerness of his research),
and various other unconsidered trifles, which had not the air of being
very honestly come by. The little rascal, under this discipline, bit and
struggled like a fox-cub, but, like that vermin, uttered neither cry nor
complaint, till a note, which Peter tore from his bosom, flew as far as
Lilias Redgauntlet, and fell at her feet. It was addressed to C. N.

‘It is for the villain Nixon.’ she said to Alan Fairford; ‘open it
without scruple; that boy is his emissary; we shall now see what the
miscreant is driving at.’

Little Benjie now gave up all further struggle, and suffered Peebles
to take from him, without resistance, a shilling, out of which Peter
declared he would pay himself principal and interest, and account for
the balance. The boy, whose attention seemed fixed on something very
different, only said, ‘Maister Nixon will murder me!’

Alan Fairford did not hesitate to read the little scrap of paper, on
which was written, ‘All is prepared--keep them in play until I come up.
You may depend on your reward.--C. C.’

‘Alas, my uncle--my poor uncle!’ said Lilias; ‘this is the result of
his confidence. Methinks, to give him instant notice of his confidant’s
treachery, is now the best service we can render all concerned--if
they break up their undertaking, as they must now do, Darsie will be at
liberty.’

In the same breath, they were both at the half-opened door of the room,
Fairford entreating to speak with the Father Buonaventure, and Lilias,
equally vehemently, requesting a moment’s interview with her uncle.
While the sentinel hesitated what to do, his attention was called to a
loud noise at the door, where a crowd had been assembled in consequence
of the appalling cry, that the enemy were upon them, occasioned, as it
afterwards proved, by some stragglers having at length discovered the
dead bodies of Nanty Ewart and of Nixon.

Amid the confusion occasioned by this alarming incident, the sentinel
ceased to attend, to his duty; and accepting Alan Fairford’s arm, Lilias
found no opposition in penetrating even to the inner apartment, where
the principal persons in the enterprise, whose conclave had been
disturbed by this alarming incident, were now assembled in great
confusion, and had been joined by the Chevalier himself.

‘Only a mutiny among these smuggling scoundrels,’ said Redgauntlet.

ONLY a mutiny, do you say?’ said Sir Richard Glendale; ‘and the lugger,
the last hope of escape for,’--he looked towards Charles,--‘stands out
to sea under a press of sail!’

‘Do not concern yourself about me,’ said the unfortunate prince; ‘this
is not the worst emergency in which it has been my lot to stand; and if
it were, I fear it not. Shift for yourselves, my lords and gentlemen.’

‘No, never!’ said the young Lord ------. ‘Our only hope now is in an
honourable resistance.’

‘Most true,’ said Redgauntlet; ‘let despair renew the union amongst
us which accident disturbed. I give my voice for displaying the royal
banner instantly, and--How now!’ he concluded, sternly, as Lilias, first
soliciting his attention by pulling his cloak, put into his hand the
scroll, and added, it was designed for that of Nixon.

Redgauntlet read--and, dropping it on the ground, continued to stare
upon the spot where it fell, with raised hands and fixed eyes. Sir
Richard Glendale lifted the fatal paper, read it, and saying, ‘Now all
is indeed over,’ handed it to Maxwell, who said aloud, ‘Black Colin
Campbell, by G--d! I heard he had come post from London last night.’

As if in echo to his thoughts, the violin of the blind man was heard,
playing with spirit, The Campbells are coming,’ a celebrated clan-march.

‘The Campbells are coming in earnest,’ said MacKellar; they are upon us
with the whole battalion from Carlisle.’

There was a silence of dismay, and two or three of the company began to
drop out of the room.

Lord ------ spoke with the generous spirit of a young English nobleman.
‘If we have been fools, do not let us be cowards. We have one here more
precious than us all, and come hither on our warranty--let us save him
at least.’

‘True, most true,’ answered Sir Richard Glendale. ‘Let the king be first
cared for.’

‘That shall be my business,’ said Redgauntlet ‘if we have but time to
bring back the brig, all will be well--I will instantly dispatch a party
in a fishing skiff to bring her to.’ He gave his commands to two or
three of the most active among his followers. ‘Let him be once on
board,’ he said, ‘and there are enough of us to stand to arms and cover
his retreat.’

‘Right, right,’ said Sir Richard, ‘and I will look to points which can
be made defensible; and the old powder-plot boys could not have made a
more desperate resistance than we shall. Redgauntlet,’ continued he, ‘I
see some of our friends are looking pale; but methinks your nephew has
more mettle in his eye now than when we were in cold deliberation, with
danger at a distance.’

‘It is the way of our house,’ said Redgauntlet; ‘our courage ever
kindles highest on the losing side. I, too, feel that the catastrophe
I have brought on must not be survived by its author. Let me first,’
he said, addressing Charles, ‘see your Majesty’s sacred person in such
safety as can now be provided for it, and then’--

‘You may spare all considerations concerning me, gentlemen,’ again
repeated Charles; ‘yon mountain of Criffel shall fly as soon as I will.’

Most threw themselves at his feet with weeping and entreaty; some one
or two slunk in confusion from the apartment, and were heard riding
off. Unnoticed in such a scene, Darsie, his sister, and Fairford, drew
together, and held each other by the hands, as those who, when a vessel
is about to founder in the storm, determine to take their chance of life
and death together.

Amid this scene of confusion, a gentleman, plainly dressed in a
riding-habit, with a black cockade in his hat, but without any arms
except a COUTEAU-DE-CHASSE, walked into the apartment without ceremony.
He was a tall, thin, gentlemanly man, with a look and bearing decidedly
military. He had passed through their guards, if in the confusion they
now maintained any, without stop or question, and now stood, almost
unarmed, among armed men, who nevertheless, gazed on him as on the angel
of destruction.

‘You look coldly on me, gentlemen,’ he said. ‘Sir Richard Glendale--my
Lord ------, we were not always such strangers. Ha, Pate-in-Peril, how
is it with you? and you, too, Ingoldsby--I must not call you by any
other name--why do you receive an old friend so coldly? But you guess my
errand.’

‘And are prepared for it, general,’ said Redgauntlet; ‘we are not men to
be penned up like sheep for the slaughter.’

‘Pshaw! you take it too seriously--let me speak but one word with you.’

‘No words can shake our purpose,’ said Redgauntlet, were your whole
command, as I suppose is the case, drawn round the house.’

‘I am certainly not unsupported,’ said the general; ‘but if you would
hear me’--

‘Hear ME, sir,’ said the Wanderer, stepping forward; ‘I suppose I am the
mark you aim at--I surrender myself willingly, to save these gentlemen’s
danger--let this at least avail in their favour.’

An exclamation of ‘Never, never!’ broke from the little body of
partisans, who threw themselves round the unfortunate prince, and would
have seized or struck down Campbell, had it not been that he remained
with his arms folded, and a look, rather indicating impatience because
they would not hear him, than the least apprehension of violence at
their hand.

At length he obtained a moment’s silence. ‘I do not,’ he said, ‘know
this gentleman’--(making a profound bow to the unfortunate prince)--‘I
do not wish to know him; it is a knowledge which would suit neither of
us.’

‘Our ancestors, nevertheless, have been well acquainted,’ said Charles,
unable to suppress, even at that hour of dread and danger, the painful
recollections of fallen royalty.

‘In one word, General Campbell,’ said Redgauntlet, ‘is it to be peace or
war? You are a man of honour, and we can trust you.’

‘I thank you, sir,’ said the general; ‘and I reply, that the answer to
your question rests with yourself. Come, do not be fools, gentlemen;
there was perhaps no great harm meant or intended by your gathering
together in this obscure corner, for a bear-bait or a cock-fight, or
whatever other amusement you may have intended, but it was a little
imprudent, considering how you stand with government, and it has
occasioned some anxiety. Exaggerated accounts of your purpose have
been laid before government by the information of a traitor in your own
counsels; and I was sent down post to take the command of a sufficient
number of troops, in case these calumnies should be found to have any
real foundation. I have come here, of course, sufficiently supported
both with cavalry and infantry, to do whatever might be necessary; but
my commands are--and I am sure they agree with my inclination--to make
no arrests, nay, to make no further inquiries of any kind, if this good
assembly will consider their own interest so far as to give up their
immediate purpose, and return quietly home to their own houses.’

‘What!--all?’ exclaimed Sir Richard Glendale--‘all, without exception?’

‘ALL, without one single exception’ said the general; ‘such are my
orders. If you accept my terms, say so, and make haste; for things may
happen to interfere with his Majesty’s kind purposes towards you all.’

‘Majesty’s kind purposes!’ said the Wanderer. ‘Do I hear you aright,
sir?’

‘I speak the king’s very words, from his very lips,’ replied the
general. ‘“I will,” said his Majesty, “deserve the confidence of my
subjects by reposing my security in the fidelity of the millions who
acknowledge my title--in the good sense and prudence of the few who
continue, from the errors of education, to disown it.” His Majesty will
not even believe that the most zealous Jacobites who yet remain can
nourish a thought of exciting a civil war, which must be fatal to their
families and themselves, besides spreading bloodshed and ruin through
a peaceful land. He cannot even believe of his kinsman, that he would
engage brave and generous though mistaken men, in an attempt which must
ruin all who have escaped former calamities; and he is convinced,
that, did curiosity or any other motive lead that person to visit this
country, he would soon see it was his wisest course to return to the
continent; and his Majesty compassionates his situation too much to
offer any obstacle to his doing so.’

‘Is this real?’ said Redgauntlet. ‘Can you mean this? Am I--are all, are
any of these gentlemen at liberty, without interruption, to embark in
yonder brig, which, I see, is now again approaching the shore?’

‘You, sir--all--any of the gentlemen present,’ said the general,--‘all
whom the vessel can contain, are at liberty to embark uninterrupted
by me; but I advise none to go off who have not powerful reasons
unconnected with the present meeting, for this will be remembered
against no one.’

‘Then, gentlemen,’ said Redgauntlet, clasping his hands together as the
words burst from him, ‘the cause is lost for ever!’

General Campbell turned away to the window, as if to avoid hearing what
they said. Their consultation was but momentary; for the door of escape
which thus opened was as unexpected as the exigence was threatening.

‘We have your word of honour for our protection,’ said Sir Richard
Glendale, ‘if we dissolve our meeting in obedience to your summons?’

‘You have, Sir Richard,’ answered the general.

‘And I also have your promise,’ said Redgauntlet, ‘that I may go on
board yonder vessel, with any friend whom I may choose to accompany me?’

Not only that, Mr. Ingoldsby--or I WILL call you Mr. Redgauntlet once
more--you may stay in the offing for a tide, until you are joined by any
person who may remain at Fairladies. After that, there will be a sloop
of war on the station, and I need not say your condition will then
become perilous.’

‘Perilous it should not be, General Campbell,’ said Redgauntlet, ‘or
more perilous to others than to us, if others thought as I do even in
this extremity.’

‘You forget yourself, my friend,’ said the unhappy Adventurer; you
forget that the arrival of this gentleman only puts the cope-stone on
our already adopted resolution to abandon our bull-fight or by whatever
other wild name this headlong enterprise may be termed. I bid you
farewell, unfriendly friends--I bid you farewell,’ (bowing to the
general) ‘my friendly foe--I leave this strand as I landed upon it,
alone and to return no more!’

‘Not alone,’ said Redgauntlet, ‘while there is blood in the veins of my
father’s son.’

‘Not alone,’ said the other gentlemen present, stung with feelings which
almost overpowered the better reasons under which they had acted. ‘We
will not disown our principles, or see your person endangered.’

‘If it be only your purpose to see the gentleman to the beach,’ said
General Campbell, ‘I will myself go with you. My presence among you,
unarmed, and in your power, will be a pledge of my friendly intentions,
and will overawe, should such be offered, any interruption on the part
of officious persons.’

‘Be it so,’ said the Adventurer, with the air of a prince to a subject,
not of one who complied with the request of an enemy too powerful to be
resisted.

They left the apartment--they left the house--an unauthenticated and
dubious, but appalling, sensation of terror had already spread itself
among the inferior retainers, who had so short time before strutted, and
bustled, and thronged the doorway and the passages. A report had arisen,
of which the origin could not be traced, of troops advancing towards the
spot in considerable numbers; and men who, for one reason or other,
were most of them amenable to the arm of power, had either shrunk into
stables or corners, or fled the place entirely. There was solitude on
the landscape excepting the small party which now moved towards the
rude pier, where a boat lay manned, agreeably to Redgauntlet’s orders
previously given.

The last heir of the Stuarts leant on Redgauntlet’s arm as they walked
towards the beach; for the ground was rough, and he no longer possessed
the elasticity of limb and of spirit which had, twenty years before,
carried him over many a Highland hill as light as one of their native
deer. His adherents followed, looking on the ground, their feelings
struggling against the dictates of their reason.

General Campbell accompanied them with an air of apparent ease and
indifference, but watching, at the same time, and no doubt with some
anxiety, the changing features of those who acted in this extraordinary
scene.

Darsie and his sister naturally followed their uncle, whose violence
they no longer feared, while his character attracted their respect, and
Alan Fairford attended them from interest in their fate, unnoticed in
a party where all were too much occupied with their own thoughts
and feelings, as well as with the impending crisis, to attend to his
presence.

Half-way betwixt the house and the beach, they saw the bodies of Nanty
Ewart and Cristal Nixon blackening in the sun.

‘That was your informer?’ said Redgauntlet, looking back to General
Campbell, who only nodded his assent.

‘Caitiff wretch!’ exclaimed Redgauntlet;--‘and yet the name were better
bestowed on the fool who could be misled by thee.’

‘That sound broadsword cut,’ said the general, ‘has saved us the shame
of rewarding a traitor.’

They arrived at the place of embarkation. The prince stood a moment with
folded arms, and looked around him in deep silence. A paper was then
slipped into his hands--he looked at it, and said, ‘I find the two
friends I have left at Fairladies are apprised of my destination,
and propose to embark from Bowness. I presume this will not be an
infringement of the conditions under which you have acted?’

‘Certainly not,’ answered General Campbell; ‘they shall have all
facility to join you.’

‘I wish, then,’ said Charles, ‘only another companion. Redgauntlet, the
air of this country is as hostile to you as it is to me. These gentlemen
have made their peace, or rather they have done nothing to break it.
But you--come you and share my home where chance shall cast it. We
shall never see these shores again; but we will talk of them, and of our
disconcerted bull-fight.’

‘I follow you, sire, through life,’ said Redgauntlet, ‘as I would have
followed you to death. Permit me one moment.’

The prince then looked round, and seeing the abashed countenances of his
other adherents bent upon the ground, he hastened to say, ‘Do not think
that you, gentlemen, have obliged me less because your zeal was mingled
with prudence, entertained, I am sure, more on my own account and on
that of your country, than from selfish apprehensions.’

He stepped from one to another, and, amid sobs and bursting tears,
received the adieus of the last remnant which had hitherto supported
his lofty pretensions, and addressed them individually with accents of
tenderness and affection.

The general drew a little aloof, and signed to Redgauntlet to speak
with him while this scene proceeded. ‘It is now all over,’ he said, ‘and
Jacobite will be henceforward no longer a party name. When you tire of
foreign parts, and wish to make your peace, let me know. Your restless
zeal alone has impeded your pardon hitherto.’

‘And now I shall not need it,’ said Redgauntlet. ‘I leave England
for ever; but I am not displeased that you should hear my family
adieus.--Nephew, come hither. In presence of General Campbell, I tell
you, that though to breed you up in my own political opinions has been
for many years my anxious wish, I am now glad that it could not be
accomplished. You pass under the service of the reigning monarch without
the necessity of changing your allegiance--a change, however,’ he added,
looking around him, which sits more easy on honourable men than I could
have anticipated; but some wear the badge of their loyalty on their
sleeve, and others in the heart. You will, from henceforth, be
uncontrolled master of all the property of which forfeiture could not
deprive your father--of all that belonged to him--excepting this, his
good sword’ (laying his hand on the weapon he wore), ‘which shall never
fight for the House of Hanover; and as my hand will never draw weapon
more, I shall sink it forty fathoms deep in the wide ocean. Bless you,
young man! If I have dealt harshly with you, forgive me. I had set my
whole desires on one point,--God knows, with no selfish purpose; and
I am justly punished by this final termination of my views, for having
been too little scrupulous in the means by which I pursued them.--Niece,
farewell, and may God bless you also!’

‘No, sir,’ said Lilias, seizing his hand eagerly. ‘You have been
hitherto my protector,--you are now in sorrow, let me be your attendant
and your comforter in exile.’

‘I thank you, my girl, for your unmerited affection; but it cannot and
must not be. The curtain here falls between us. I go to the house of
another. If I leave it before I quit the earth, it shall be only for the
House of God. Once more, farewell both! The fatal doom,’ he said, with
a melancholy smile, ‘will, I trust, now depart from the House of
Redgauntlet, since its present representative has adhered to the winning
side. I am convinced he will not change it, should it in turn become the
losing one.’

The unfortunate Charles Edward had now given his last adieus to his
downcast adherents. He made a sign with his hand to Redgauntlet, who
came to assist him into the skiff. General Campbell also offered his
assistance, the rest appearing too much affected by the scene which had
taken place to prevent him.

‘You are not sorry, general, to do me this last act of courtesy,’ said
the Chevalier; ‘and, on my part, I thank you for it. You have taught me
the principle on which men on the scaffold feel forgiveness and kindness
even for their executioner. Farewell!’

They were seated in the boat, which presently pulled off from the land.
The Oxford divine broke out into a loud benediction, in terms which
General Campbell was too generous to criticize at the time, or to
remember afterwards;--nay, it is said, that, Whig and Campbell as he
was, he could not help joining in the universal Amen! which resounded
from the shore.




CONCLUSION, BY DR. DRYASDUST

IN A LETTER TO THE AUTHOR OF WAVERLEY

I am truly sorry, my worthy and much-respected sir, that my anxious
researches have neither, in the form of letters, nor of diaries or other
memoranda, been able to discover more than I have hitherto transmitted,
of the history of the Redgauntlet family. But I observe in an old
newspaper called the WHITEHALL GAZETTE, of which I fortunately possess a
file for several years, that Sir Arthur Darsie Redgauntlet was
presented to his late Majesty at the drawing-room, by Lieut.-General
Campbell--upon which the editor observes, in the way of comment, that
we were going, REMIS ATQUE VELIS, into the interests of the Pretender,
since a Scot had presented a Jacobite at Court. I am sorry I have not
room (the frank being only uncial) for his further observations, tending
to show the apprehensions entertained by many well-instructed persons of
the period, that the young king might himself be induced to become one
of the Stuarts’ faction,--a catastrophe from which it has pleased Heaven
to preserve these kingdoms.

I perceive also, by a marriage-contract in the family repositories, that
Miss Lilias Redgauntlet of Redgauntlet, about eighteen months after the
transactions you have commemorated, intermarried with Alan Fairford,
Esq., Advocate, of Clinkdollar, who, I think, we may not unreasonably
conclude to be the same person whose name occurs so frequently in
the pages of your narration. In my last excursion to Edinburgh, I was
fortunate enough to discover an old caddie, from whom, at the expense
of a bottle of whisky and half a pound of tobacco, I extracted the
important information, that he knew Peter Peebles very well, and had
drunk many a mutchkin with him in Caddie Fraser’s time. He said ‘that
he lived ten years after King George’s accession, in the momentary
expectation of winning his cause every day in the session time, and
every hour in the day, and at last fell down dead, in what my informer
called a ‘perplexity fit,’ upon a proposal for a composition being made
to him in the Outer House. I have chosen to retain my informer’s phrase,
not being able justly to determine whether it is a corruption of the
word apoplexy, as my friend Mr. Oldbuck supposes, or the name of some
peculiar disorder incidental to those who have concern in the courts of
law, as many callings and conditions of men have diseases appropriate to
themselves. The same caddie also remembered Blind Willie Stevenson, who
was called Wandering Willie, and who ended his days ‘unco beinly, in Sir
Arthur Redgauntlet’s ha’ neuk.’ ‘He had done the family some good turn,’
he said, ‘specially when ane of the Argyle gentlemen was coming down on
a wheen of them that had the “auld leaven” about them, and wad hae taen
every man of them, and nae less nor headed and hanged them. But Willie,
and a friend they had, called Robin the Rambler, gae them warning, by
playing tunes such as “The Campbells are coming” and the like, whereby
they got timeous warning to take the wing.’ I need not point out to your
acuteness, my worthy sir, that this seems to refer to some inaccurate
account of the transactions in which you seem so much interested.

Respecting Redgauntlet, about whose subsequent history you are more
particularly inquisitive, I have learned from an excellent person
who was a priest in the Scottish Monastery of Ratisbon, before its
suppression, that he remained for two or three years in the family of
the Chevalier, and only left it at last in consequence of some discords
in that melancholy household. As he had hinted to General Campbell, he
exchanged his residence for the cloister, and displayed in the latter
part of his life, a strong sense of the duties of religion, which in
his earlier days he had too much neglected, being altogether engaged in
political speculations and intrigues. He rose to the situation of prior,
in the house which he belonged to, and which was of a very strict order
of religion. He sometimes received his countrymen, whom accident brought
to Ratisbon, and curiosity induced to visit the Monastery of ------. But
it was remarked, that though he listened with interest and attention,
when Britain, or particularly Scotland, became the subject of
conversation, yet he never either introduced or prolonged the subject,
never used the English language, never inquired about English affairs,
and, above all, never mentioned his own family. His strict observation
of the rules of his order gave him, at the time of his death, some
pretensions to be chosen a saint, and the brethren of the Monastery
of ------ made great efforts for that effect, and brought forward some
plausible proofs of miracles. But there was a circumstance which threw
a doubt over the subject, and prevented the consistory from acceding
to the wishes of the worthy brethren. Under his habit, and secured in
a small silver box, he had worn perpetually around his neck a lock
of-hair, which the fathers avouched to be a relic. But the Avvocato del
Diabolo, in combating (as was his official duty) the pretensions of
the candidate for sanctity, made it at least equally probable that the
supposed relic was taken from the head of a brother of the deceased
prior, who had been executed for adherence to the Stuart family in
1745-6; and the motto, HAUD OBLIVISCENDUM, seemed to intimate a tone
of mundane feeling and recollection of injuries, which made it at least
doubtful whether, even in the quiet and gloom of the cloister,
Father Hugo had forgotten the sufferings and injuries of the House of
Redgauntlet.

June 10, 1824,




NOTES

NOTE 1.--THE SOCIETY OF FRIENDS

In explanation of this circumstance, I cannot help adding a note not
very necessary for the reader, which yet I record with pleasure, from
recollection of the kindness which it evinces. In early youth I resided
for a considerable time in the vicinity of the beautiful village
of Kelso, where my life passed in a very solitary manner. I had few
acquaintances, scarce any companions, and books, which were at the time
almost essential to my happiness, were difficult to come by. It was then
that I was particularly indebted to the liberality and friendship of
an old lady of the Society of Friends, eminent for her benevolence and
charity. Her deceased husband had been a medical man of eminence,
and left her, with other valuable property, a small and well-selected
library. This the kind old lady permitted me to rummage at pleasure, and
carry home what volumes I chose, on condition that I should take, at the
same time, some of the tracts printed for encouraging and extending the
doctrines of her own sect. She did not even exact any promise that I
would read these performances, being too justly afraid of involving me
in a breach of promise, but was merely desirous that I should have
the chance of instruction within my reach, in case whim, curiosity, or
accident, might induce me to have recourse to it.


NOTE 2.--THE PERSECUTORS

The personages here mentioned are most of them characters of historical
fame; but those less known and remembered may be found in the tract
entitled, ‘The Judgment and Justice of God Exemplified, or, a Brief
Historical Account of some of the Wicked Lives and Miserable Deaths of
some of the most remarkable Apostates and Bloody Persecutors, from
the Reformation till after the Revolution.’ This constitutes a sort of
postscript or appendix to John Howie of Lochgoin’s ‘Account of the Lives
of the most eminent Scots Worthies.’ The author has, with considerable
ingenuity, reversed his reasoning upon the inference to be drawn from
the prosperity or misfortunes which befall individuals in this world,
either in the course of their lives or in the hour of death. In the
account of the martyrs’ sufferings, such inflictions are mentioned only
as trials permitted by providence, for the better and brighter display
of their faith, and constancy of principle. But when similar afflictions
befell the opposite party, they are imputed to the direct vengeance of
Heaven upon their impiety. If, indeed, the life of any person obnoxious
to the historian’s censures happened to have passed in unusual
prosperity, the mere fact of its being finally concluded by death,
is assumed as an undeniable token of the judgement of Heaven, and, to
render the conclusion inevitable, his last scene is generally garnished
with some singular circumstances. Thus the Duke of Lauderdale is said,
through old age but immense corpulence, to have become so sunk in
spirits, ‘that his heart was not the bigness of a walnut.’


NOTE 3.--LAMENTATION FOR THE DEAD

I have heard in my youth some such wild tale as that placed in the
mouth of the blind fiddler, of which, I think, the hero was Sir Robert
Grierson of Lagg, the famous persecutor. But the belief was general
throughout Scotland that the excessive lamentation over the loss of
friends disturbed the repose of the dead, and broke even the rest of the
grave. There are several instances of this in tradition, but one struck
me particularly, as I heard it from the lips of one who professed
receiving it from those of a ghost-seer. This was a Highland lady, named
Mrs. C---- of B------, who probably believed firmly in the truth of an
apparition which seems to have originated in the weakness of her nerves
and strength of her imagination. She had been lately left a widow by her
husband, with the office of guardian to their only child. The young man
added to the difficulties of his charge by an extreme propensity for a
military life, which his mother was unwilling to give way to, while
she found it impossible to repress it. About this time the Independent
Companies, formed for the preservation of the peace of the Highlands,
were in the course of being levied; and as a gentleman named Cameron,
nearly connected with Mrs. C--, commanded one of those companies,
she was at length persuaded to compromise the matter with her son, by
permitting him to enter this company in the capacity of a cadet, thus
gratifying his love of a military life without the dangers of foreign
service, to which no one then thought these troops were at all liable to
be exposed, while even their active service at home was not likely to
be attended with much danger. She readily obtained a promise from her
relative that he would be particular in his attention to her son and
therefore concluded she had accommodated matters between her son’s
wishes and his safety in a way sufficiently attentive to both. She set
off to Edinburgh to get what was awanting for his outfit, and shortly
afterwards received melancholy news from the Highlands. The Independent
Company into which her son was to enter had a skirmish with a party of
caterans engaged in some act of spoil, and her friend the captain
being wounded, and out of the reach of medical assistance, died in
consequence. This news was a thunderbolt to the poor mother, who was at
once deprived of her kinsman’s advice and assistance, and instructed by
his fate of the unexpected danger to which her son’s new calling exposed
him. She remained also in great sorrow for her relative, whom she loved
with sisterly affection. These conflicting causes of anxiety,
together with her uncertainty, whether to continue or change her son’s
destination, were terminated in the following manner:--

The house in which Mrs. C---- resided in the old town of Edinburgh, was
a flat or story of a land accessible, as was then universal, by a common
stair. The family who occupied the story beneath were her acquaintances,
and she was in the habit of drinking tea with them every evening. It was
accordingly about six o’clock, when, recovering herself from a deep fit
of anxious reflection, she was about to leave the parlour in which she
sat in order to attend this engagement. The door through which she was
to pass opened, as was very common in Edinburgh, into a dark passage. In
this passage, and within a yard of her when she opened the door,
stood the apparition of her kinsman, the deceased officer, in his full
tartans, and wearing his bonnet. Terrified at what she saw, or thought
she saw, she closed the door hastily, and, sinking on her knees by
a chair, prayed to be delivered from the horrors of the vision. She
remained in that posture till her friends below tapped on the door,
to intimate that tea was ready. Recalled to herself by the signal, she
arose, and, on opening the apartment door, again was confronted by
the visionary Highlander, whose bloody brow bore token, on this second
appearance, to the death he had died. Unable to endure this repetition
of her terrors, Mrs. C---- sank on the door in a swoon. Her friends
below, startled with the noise, came upstairs, and, alarmed at the
situation in which they found her, insisted on her going to bed and
taking some medicine, in order to compose what they took for a nervous
attack. They had no sooner left her in quiet, than the apparition of
the soldier was once more visible in the apartment. This time she took
courage and said, ‘In the name of God, Donald, why do you haunt one who
respected and loved you when living?’ To which he answered readily, in
Gaelic, ‘Cousin, why did you not speak sooner? My rest is disturbed by
your unnecessary lamentation--your tears scald me in my shroud. I come
to tell you that my untimely death ought to make no difference in your
views for your son; God will raise patrons to supply my place and he
will live to the fullness of years, and die honoured and at peace.’ The
lady of course followed her kinsman’s advice and as she was accounted
a person of strict veracity, we may conclude the first apparition an
illusion of the fancy, the final one a lively dream suggested by the
other two.


NOTE 4.--PETER PEEBLES

This unfortunate litigant (for a person named Peter Peebles actually
flourished) frequented the courts of justice in Scotland about the year
1792, and the sketch of his appearance is given from recollection. The
author is of opinion that he himself had at one time the honour to be
counsel for Peter Peebles, whose voluminous course of litigation served
as a sort of assay-pieces to most young men who were called to the bar.
The scene of the consultation is entirely imaginary.


NOTE 5.--JOHN’S COFFEE-HOUSE

This small dark coffee-house, now burnt down, was the resort of such
writers and clerks belonging to the Parliament House above thirty years
ago as retained the ancient Scottish custom of a meridian, as it was
called, or noontide dram of spirits. If their proceedings were watched,
they might be seen to turn fidgety about the hour of noon, and exchange
looks with each other from their separate desks, till at length some one
of formal and dignified presence assumed the honour of leading the band,
when away they went, threading the crowd like a string of wild
fowl, crossed the square or close, and following each other into
the coffee-house, received in turn from the hand of the waiter, the
meridian, which was placed ready at the bar. This they did, day by day:
and though they did not speak to each other, they seemed to attach a
certain degree of sociability to performing the ceremony in company.


NOTE 6.--FISHING RIGHTS

It may be here mentioned, that a violent and popular attack upon what
the country people of this district considered as an invasion of their
fishing right is by no means an improbable fiction. Shortly after the
close of the American war, Sir James Graham of Netherby constructed a
dam-dyke, or cauld, across the Esk, at a place where it flowed through
his estate, though it has its origin, and the principal part of its
course, in Scotland. The new barrier at Netherby was considered as
an encroachment calculated to prevent the salmon from ascending into
Scotland, and the right of erecting it being an international question
of law betwixt the sister kingdoms, there was no court in either
competent to its decision. In this dilemma, the Scots people assembled
in numbers by signal of rocket lights, and, rudely armed with
fowling-pieces, fish-spears, and such rustic weapons, marched to the
banks of the river for the purpose of pulling down the dam-dyke objected
to. Sir James Graham armed many of his own people to protect his
property, and had some military from Carlisle for the same purpose.
A renewal of the Border wars had nearly taken place in the eighteenth
century, when prudence and moderation on both sides saved much tumult,
and perhaps some bloodshed. The English proprietor consented that a
breach should be made in his dam-dyke sufficient for the passage of the
fish, and thus removed the Scottish grievance. I believe the river has
since that time taken the matter into its own disposal, and entirely
swept away the dam-dyke in question.


NOTE 7.--STATE OF SCOTLAND

Scotland, in its half-civilized state, exhibited too many examples
of the exertion of arbitrary force and violence, rendered easy by the
dominion which lairds exerted over their tenants and chiefs over their
clans. The captivity of Lady Grange, in the desolate cliffs of Saint
Kilda, is in the recollection of every one. At the supposed date of the
novel also a man of the name of Merrilees, a tanner in Leith, absconded
from his country to escape his creditors; and after having slain his own
mastiff dog, and put a bit of red cloth in its mouth, as if it had died
in a contest with soldiers, and involved his own existence in as
much mystery as possible, made his escape into Yorkshire. Here he was
detected by persons sent in search of him, to whom he gave a portentous
account of his having been carried off and concealed in various places.
Mr. Merrilees was, in short, a kind of male Elizabeth Canning, but did
not trespass on the public credulity quite so long.


NOTE 8.--CONCEALMENTS FOR THEFT AND SMUGGLING

I am sorry to say that the modes of concealment described in the
imaginary premises of Mr. Trumbull, are of a kind which have been common
on the frontiers of late years. The neighbourhood of two nations having
different laws, though united in government, still leads to a multitude
of transgressions on the Border, and extreme difficulty in apprehending
delinquents. About twenty years since, as far as my recollection serves,
there was along the frontier an organized gang of coiners, forgers,
smugglers, and other malefactors, whose operations were conducted on a
scale not inferior to what is here described. The chief of the party was
one Richard Mendham a carpenter, who rose to opulence, although ignorant
even of the arts of reading and writing. But he had found a short
road to wealth, and had taken singular measures for conducting his
operations. Amongst these, he found means to build, in a suburb
of Berwick called Spittal, a street of small houses, as if for the
investment of property. He himself inhabited one of these; another, a
species of public-house, was open to his confederates, who held secret
and unsuspected communication with him by crossing the roofs of the
intervening houses, and descending by a trap-stair, which admitted them
into the alcove of the dining-room of Dick Mendham’s private mansion.
A vault, too, beneath Mendham’s stable, was accessible in the manner
mentioned in the novel. The post of one of the stalls turned round on
a bolt being withdrawn, and gave admittance to a subterranean place of
concealment for contraband and stolen goods, to a great extent. Richard
Mendham, the head of this very formidable conspiracy, which involved
malefactors of every kind, was tried and executed at Jedburgh, where the
author was present as Sheriff of Selkirkshire. Mendham had previously
been tried, but escaped by want of proof and the ingenuity of his
counsel.


NOTE 9--CORONATION OF GEORGE III

In excuse of what may be considered as a violent infraction of
probability in this chapter, the author is under the necessity of
quoting a tradition which many persons may recollect having heard. It
was always said, though with very little appearance of truth, that upon
the Coronation of the late George III, when the champion of England,
Dymock, or his representative, appeared in Westminster Hall, and in
the language of chivalry solemnly wagered his body to defend in single
combat the right of the young King to the crown of these realms, at the
moment when he flung down his gauntlet as the gage of battle, an unknown
female stepped from the crowd and lifted the pledge, leaving another
gage in room of it, with a paper expressing, that if a fair field of
combat should be allowed, a champion of rank and birth would appear with
equal arms to dispute the claim of King George to the British kingdoms.
The story is probably one of the numerous fictions which were circulated
to keep up the spirits of a sinking faction, The incident was, however,
possible, if it could be supposed to be attended by any motive adequate
to the risk, and might be imagined to occur to a person of Redgauntlet’s
enthusiastic character. George III, it is said, had a police of his own,
whose agency was so efficient, that the sovereign was able to tell
his prime minister upon one occasion, to his great surprise, that the
Pretender was in London. The prime minister began immediately to talk of
measures to be taken, warrants to be procured, messengers and guards
to be got in readiness. ‘Pooh, pooh,’ said the good-natured sovereign,
since I have found him out, leave me alone to deal with him.’--‘And
what,’ said the minister, ‘is your Majesty’s purpose, in so important a
case?’--‘To leave the young man to himself,’ said George III; ‘and when
he tires he will go back again.’ The truth of this story does not depend
on that of the lifting of the gauntlet; and while the latter could be
but an idle bravado, the former expresses George Ill’s goodness of heart
and soundness of policy.


NOTE 10.--COLLIER AND SALTER

The persons engaged in these occupations were at this time bondsmen; and
in case they left the ground of the farm to which they belonged, and as
pertaining to which their services were bought or sold, they were liable
to be brought back by a summary process. The existence of this species
of slavery being thought irreconcilable with the spirit of liberty,
colliers and salters were declared free, and put upon the same footing
with other servants, by the Act 15 Geo. III chapter 28th. They were so
far from desiring or prizing the blessing conferred on them, that they
esteemed the interest taken in their freedom to be a mere decree on the
part of the proprietors to get rid of what they called head and harigald
money, payable to them when a female of their number, by bearing a
child, made an addition to the live stock of their master’s property.




GLOSSARY

   ABOON, above.
   AD LITEM, in law.
   AD VINDICTAM PUBLICAM, for the public defence.
   ADUST, looking as if burned or scorched.
   AE, one.
   AFFLATUS, breath, inspiration.
   AIRT, direct.
   ALCANDER, a Greek soothsayer.
   ALDEBORONTIPHOSCOPHORNIO, a courtier in H. Carey’s burlesque,
       CHRONONHOTONTHOLOGOS.
   ALIMENTARY, nourishing.
   ALQUIFE, an enchanter in the mediaeval romances of knight-errantry.
   AMADIS, a hero of the romances, especially in Amadis of Gaul.
   ANENT, about.
   ANES, once.
   ANNO DOMINI, in the year of the Lord.
   ARGUMENTUM AD HOMINEM, AD FEMINAM, lit. ‘the argument to a man,
       to a woman,’ refutation of a man’s argument by an example
       drawn from his own conduct.
   ARIES, earnest-money, a gift.
   ARS LONGA, VITA BREVIS, art is long, life short.
   ARS MEDENDI, art of medicine.
   APPROBATE, approve.
   ATLANTES, a character in ORLANDO FURIOSO.
   AULD REEKIE, Edinburgh.
   ADVOCATO DEL DIABOLO, lit. ‘the devil’s advocate’, one whose duty
       it is to oppose the canonization of a person on whose behalf
       claims to sanctity are made.
   AWSOME, awful, fearful.

   BACK-GANGING, behind hand in paying.
   BACKSPAUL, the back of the shoulder.
   BALLANT, a ballad, a fable.
   BANNOCK, a flat, round cake.
   BARLEY-BROO, barley-broth.
   BARON-OFFICER, the magistrate’s officer in a burgh of barony.
   BARTIZAN, a small overhanging turret, the battlements.
   BEAUFET, cupboard.
   BEAVER, the lower part of the helmet.
   BEIN, comfortable.
   BELISARIUS, a general of the Eastern Empire ungratefully treated
       by the Emperor Justinian.
   BENEDICTE, bless you.
   BETIMES THE MORN, early in the morning.
   BICKER, a wooden vessel for holding drink; a quarrel.
   BILLIE, a term of familiarity, comrade.
   BIRKIE, a smart fellow.
   BIRLING, merry-making.
   BIT, small.
   BLATE, shy, bashful.
   BLAWING, flattering.
   BLEEZING, bragging.
   BLUE-CAP, a Scotsman.
   BOGLE, a ghost, a scarecrow.
   BON VIVANTS, lovers of good living.
   BONA ROBA, a showy wanton.
   BONUS SOCIUS, good comrade.
   BORREL, common, rude.
   BRAID, broad.
   BRASH, a sudden storm, an attack.
   BRATTLE, a clattering noise, as of a horse going at full speed.
   BRAW, brave, fine.
   BRENT BROO, high brow.
   BROCARD, maxim.
   BROSE, oatmeal which has had boiling water poured upon it.
   BROWN, a famous landscape gardener.
   BROWST, a brewing.
   BUCEPHALUS, the favourite horse of Alexander the Great.
   BUCKIE, an imp, a fellow with an evil twist in his character.
   BUFF NOR STYE, neither one thing nor another.
   BUFFERS, pistols.
   BUSK, deck up.
   BY ORDINAR, extraordinary, uncommon.
   BYE AND ATTOUR, over and above.

   CADGER, a travelling dealer.
   CADDIE, a porter, an errand-boy.
   CAETERA PRORSUS IGNORO, in short, I know nothing of the rest.
   CALLANT, a young lad.
   CALLER, cool, fresh.
   CANNY, shrewd, prudent, quiet.
   CANTLE, fragment.
   CAPERNOITED, crabbed, foolish.
   CAPRICCIOS, a fanciful composition.
   CAPRIOLE, a leap made by a horse without advancing.
   CARDINAL, a woman’s cloak.
   CARLINES, old women.
   CATILINA OMNIUM, ETC. Catilina had surrounded himself with the
       most vile and criminal company.
   CAUSEWAY, path, roadway.
   CAVALIERE SERVENTE, gentleman in attendance.
   CAVE NE LITERAS, ETC. take care that you are not carrying
       Bellerophon’s letters (letters unfavourable to the bearer).
   CHACK, a slight repast.
   CHANCY, safe, auspicious.
   CHANGE-HOUSE, a small inn or ale-house.
   CHANTER, the tenor or treble pipe in a bag-pipe.
   CHAPE, a thin metal blade at the end of a scabbard.
   CHAPEAU BRAS, a low, three-cornered hat.
   CHOUGH, a bird of the crow family.
   CHUCKY, fowl.
   CHUCKY-STONES, small stones, a child’s game.
   CLAP AND HOPPER, signs of the mill.
   CLAVERS, gossip, idle talk.
   CLEEK, lay hold on.
   CLEIK IN, to join company.
   CLOSE, an alley, a narrow way.
   CLOSE-HEADS, the entry to an alley, a meeting-place for gossips.
   CLOUR, to strike, to bump.
   COBLE, a little boat.
   COCKERNONY, top-knot.
   COGIE, small wooden bowl.
   COMMUNE FORUM, ETC. the common court is the common dwelling-place.
   CORDWAIN, Spanish leather.
   CORIOLANUS, a Roman patrician, who, being driven from the city,
       took refuge with Aufidius, the leader of the Volsci.
   COUP, fall, upset.
   COURIER DE L’EUROPE, a newspaper.
   COVYNE, artifice.
   CRACK, gossip.
   CRAIG, throat, neck.
   CRAWSTEP, the steplike edges of a gable seen in some old houses.
   CREEL, basket carried on the back.
   CREMONY, Cremona [where the best fiddles were made].
   CROWDER, fiddler.
   CUR ME EXAMINAS QUERELIS TUIS?, why do you wear me out with your
       complaints.
   CURN, a very little.

   DAFT, crazy.
   DAIS, a canopy, a table placed above the others, a room of state.
   DARGLE, dell.
   DAURG, day’s work.
   DE APICIBUS JURIS, from the high places of the law.
   DE PERICULO ET COMMODO REI VENDITAE, concerning the risk and
       profit of sales.
   DEAD-THRAW, death-thraw.
   DEBOSHED, debauched.
   DEFORCEMENT--SPULZIE--SOUTHRIEF, legal terms for resisting an
       officer of law.
   DEIL, devil.
   DELATE, accuse.
   DELICT, misdemeanour, QUASI DELICT, apparent offence.
   DEPONE, to testify.
   DERNIER RESORT, last resort.
   DIABLERIE, sorcery, witchcraft.
   DILIGENCE, writ of execution, coach.
   DING, to knock, beat down.
   DIRDUM, uproar, disturbance.
   DITTAY, an indictment.
   DIVOT, thin turf used for thatching cottages.
   DOCH AN DORROCH, the stirrup cup.
   DOMINUS LITIS, one of the principals in a law suit.
   DOOL, sorrow, sad consequences.
   DOOR-CHEEK, door-post.
   DOUCE, respectable.
   DRAMATIS PERSONAE, persons of the drama.
   DRAPPIT, fried.
   DRIBBLE, a drop.
   DRIFT, drift-snow.
   DULCINEA, Don Quixote’s imaginary mistress.
   DUNSTABLE, something simple and matter-of-fact.
   DYVOUR, bankrupt.

   EKE, addition.
   EMBONPOINT, plumpness.
   EN CROUPE, riding behind one another.
   ET PER CONTRA, and on the other side.
   EVITE, avoid.
   EX COMITATE, out of courtesy.
   EX MISERICORDIA, out of pity.
   EXCEPTIO FIRMAT REGULAM, the exception proves the rule.
   EXOTIC, of foreign origin.

   FACTOR LOCO TUTORIS, an agent acting in place of a guardian.
   FARDEL, burden.
   FASH, FASHERIE, trouble.
   FECK, space.
   FEMME DE CHAMBRE, chamber-maid.
   FIERI, to be made.
   FLACON, a smelling bottle.
   FLAP, gust.
   FLIP, a drink consisting of beer and spirit sweetened.
   FLORY, frothy.
   FORBY, besides.
   FORENSIC, legal.
   FORFOUGHEN, out of breath, distressed.
   FORPIT, fourth part of a peck.
   FORTALICE, a small outwork.
   FRIST, to postpone, give credit,
   FUGIE, fugitive.
   FUNCTUS OFFICIO, having finished my duties, ‘out of office’.

   GABERLUNZIE, a beggar.
   GAEN, gone.
   GALLOWAY, a strong Scotch cob.
   GANGREL, wandering, a vagrant.
   GAR, to force, make.
   GATE, way, road.
   GAUGER, an exciseman.
   GENTRICE, gentle blood.
   GIFF-GAFF, give and take.
   GIRDED, hooped like a barrel.
   GIRN, to grin, cry.
   GLAIKET, giddy, rash.
   GLIFF, glimpse, moment,
   GOWFF BA’, golf ball.
   GRAINED, groaned.
   GRANA INVECTA ET ILLATA, grain brought and imported.
   GRAT, wept.
   GRILLADE, a broiled dish.
   GRIT, great.
   GROSSART, gooseberry.
   GRUE, to creep, shiver,
   GUDESIRE, grandfather.
   GUIDE, to deal with, to employ.
   GUMPLE-FOISTED, sulky, sullen.
   GWAY, very.
   GYTES, contemptuous name for a young child, a brat.

   HAFFLINS, half-grown.
   HAILL, all, the whole.
   HAIRST, harvest.
   HAMESUCKEN, assaulting a person in his own house.
   HAMSHACKLE, to fasten.
   HANK, a hold.
   HAP, to hop, turn from.
   HARPOCRATES, an Egyptian god, supposed by the Greeks to be the
       god of silence.
   HAUGH, holm, low-lying flat ground.
   HAULD, place of abode.
   HAVINGS, behaviour.
   HEFTED, closed, as a knife in its haft.
   HELLICAT, extravagant, light-headed.
   HEMPEY, rogue.
   HET, hot.
   HEUCK, sickle.
   HINC ILLAE LACRYMAE, hence these tears.
   HINNY, honey, a term of endearment.
   HIPPOGRIFF, a fabulous winged animal, half horse and half griffin.
   HODDIN-GREY, cloth manufactured from undyed wool.
   HOMOLOGATING, ratifying, approving.
   HOOKS, OFF THE, light-headed.
   HOSE-NET, a small net used for rivulet fishing.
   HOW-COME-SO, light-headed.
   HUMOURSOME, subject to moods.
   HUSSEY, lady’s needle-case.
   HYSON, green tea from China.

   IGNIS FATUUS, will o’ the wisp.
   ILK, each; of the same name, as Redgauntlet of that Ilk
       =Redgauntlet of Redgauntlet.
   ILL-DEEDIE, mischievous.
   ILL-FAUR’D, ugly, ill-favoured.
   IN CIVILIBUS or CRIMINALIBUS, in civil or criminal causes.
   IN FORO CONSCIENTIAE, in the assize of conscience.
   IN MEDITATIONE FUGAE, meditating flight.
   IN PRESENTIA DOMINORUM, before the Lords.
   INCEDIT SICUT LEO VORANS, goeth about like a roaring lion.
   INCOGNITA, unknown.
   INFRA DIG, beneath one’s dignity.
   INSTANTER, at once.
   INTROMIT, to medldle with.
   INVITA MINERVA, against my bent.

   JACK, a metal pitcher.
   JAZY, wig.
   JET D’EAU, jet of water.
   JORUM, a drinking-vessel, or the liquor in it.
   JOW, to toll.
   JURIDICAL, pertaining to a judge or to the courts.

   KATTERFELTO, a famous quack.
   KEEK, to look.
   KEFFEL, a bad horse.

   LAIGH, low.
   LAND-LOUPER, runagate, vagabond.
   LARES, household gods, the special divinities of a family.
   LAP, leaped; fold.
   LAVE, rest, remainder.
   LAWING, inn reckoning.
   LEAL, loyal, true.
   LEASING-MAKING, lies, slander, seditious words.
   LEASOWES, the estate of the poet Shenstone.
   LEE-SIDE, the side of a vessel farthest from the point where the
       wind blows.
   LEESOME LANE, his dear self alone.
   LEEVIN, living.
   LEE WAY, arrears of work.
   LEG, TO MAKE A, to bow.
   LETTRES DE CACHET, sealed letters issued by the King of France,
       conferring power over the liberty of others.
   LEX AQUARUM, the law of the waters.
   LIMMER, a loose woman, a jade.
   LING, thin long grass, heather.
   LOANING, a meadow, pasture where the cows were milked,
   LOE, love.
   LOON, fellow, rogue.
   LOOPY, crafty.
   LOUIS-D’OR, a French gold coin worth from 16s, 6d. to 18s. 9d.
   LOUP, leap.
   LOUP-THE-DYKE, giddy, runaway.
   LOUP THE TETHER, breaking loose from restraint.
   LOVELACE AND BELFORD, characters in CLARISSA HARLOWE.
   LUCKY, a name given to an elderly dame.
   LUG, the ear.
   LUM, chimney.

   MACER, a court official.
   MAILING, a small farm or rented property.
   MAILS, rents.
   MALVERSATION, fraudulent tricks.
   MANUMISSION, liberty.
   MARCH, border.
   MARE MAGNUM, the great sea.
   MARIUS, a Roman general, leader in the civil war against Sulla.
   MEAR, mare.
   MENE, MENE, TEKEL, UPHARSIN, the writing seen by Belshazzar
       (Daniel V. 25).
   MENYIE, retinue.
   MERIDIAN, noon; a mid-day drink.
   MERK, an old Scottish coin=1s. 1 1/2d. in English money.
   MESSAN, a lap-dog, a little dog.
   MICKLE, much.
   MIFFED, piqued.
   MILLAR, Philip Millar, author of several works on gardening.
   MINOS, a law-giver of Crete, afterwards set as a judge in Hades.
   MISHANTER, mischief.
   MISPRISION OF TREASON, concealment of treason.
   MOIDART, a loch in Inverness, where Prince Charles Stuart landed,
       1745.
   MOIDORE, a gold coin of Portugal worth about L1 7s. 0d.
   MORE SOLITO, in the accustomed manner.
   MORE TUO, in your own way.
   MUILS, slippers.
   MUISTED, scented.
   MUTCHKIN, English pint.

   NE QUID NIMIS, do nothing in excess.
   NEGATUR, lit. ‘it is denied,’ I deny it.
   NEGOTIORUM GESTOR, manager of affairs.
   NEREID, a sea-nymph.
   NIGRI SUNT HYACINTHI, irises are dark flowers.
   NIHIL NOVIT IN CAUSA, nothing is known of the case.
   NIPPERKIN, a small cup, a liquid measure.
   NOM DE GUERRE, professional name.
   NOMINE DAMNI, in the name of damages.
   NONJURING, not swearing allegiance to the government, loyal to the
       Stuarts.
   NOSCITUR A SOCIO, he is known by his friend.
   NOVITER REPERTUM, newly discovered.

   OHE, JAM SATIS, oh, enough.
   OMNE IGNOTUM PRO TERRIBILI, the unknown is always held in terror.
   OMNI SUSPICIONE MAJOR, above all suspicion.
   ORESTES AND PYLADES, DAMON AND PYTHIAS, classical examples of
       friendship.
   ORIGO MALI, cause of the evil.
   ORNATURE, adornment, decoration.
   ORRA, odd.
   OVERTURE, opening.
   OWERLAY, cravat.
   OYE, a grandson.

   PACK OR PEEL, to traffic.
   PANDE MANUM, hold out your hand.
   PANDECTS, a digest of Roman law.
   PAR EXCELLENCE, above all, specially.
   PAR ORDONNANCE DU MEDECIN, by the doctor’s orders.
   PARMA NON BENE SELECTA, a shield, or defence, not well chosen.
   PAROCHINE, parish.
   PATER NOSTER, Our Father, the Lord’s Prayer.
   PATRIA POTESTAS, paternal authority.
   PAWMIE, a stroke on the palm of the hand.
   PEACH, betray, speak out.
   PEEL-HOUSE, a small fortified house, or tower.
   PEGASUS, the winged horse of the Muses.
   PENDENTE LITE, whilst the case is proceeding.
   PENDICLES, articles, small parts.
   PER AMBAGES, by circumlocution, in a roundabout way.
   PER CONTRA, on the other side.
   PERDU, concealed, lost.
   PERIPATETIC, walking, wandering.
   PESSIMI EXEMPLI, the worst possible example.
   PETTLE, a plough-staff.
   PHALARIS’S BULL, a furnace shaped like a bull into which the
       tyrant Phalaris used to cast his victims.
   PISCATOR, fisherman.
   PISTOLE, a gold coin worth about 16s.
   PLACK, a small copper coin, equal to one-third of an English penny.
   PLEACH, interweave.
   PLICATIONS, folds, wrinkles.
   PLOY, a frolic.
   POCK-PUDDING, a contemptuous term applied to Englishmen
   POINT D’ESPAGNE, Spanish lace.
   POKE, pocket.
   PORT ROYAL, a monastery near Paris which became the headquarters
       of the Jansenists, the opponents of the Jesuits.
   POSSE COMITATUS, the civil force of a county.
   POUND SCOTS, worth about 1s. 8d. English money.
   PRACTIQUES, practices of the profession.
   PRECOGNITION, examination prior to prosecution.
   PRECOGNOSCED, to take precognition of.
   PRETERMIT, omit, pass by.
   PURSUIVANTS, an officer-at-arms, in rank below a herald.

   QUAERE, query, a question.
   QUEAN, a young woman, a wench.
   QUI VIVE, alert, cautious.
   QUID, piece of tobacco to chew.
   QUID TIBI CUM LYRA, what hast thou to do with the lyre?
   QUORUM, the body of justices, so called from a word used in the
       commission appointing them.

   RANT, a noisy dance-tune.
   RAPPAREE, an Irish plunderer; a worthless fellow,
   RATIONE OFFICII, by virtue of his position.
   RATTLING, lively, brisk.
   RAX, stretch.
   REAMING, frothing, foaming.
   REDD, clear up, tidy.
   REGIAM MAJESTATEM, a collection of Scotch laws.
   REIVER, robber.
   REMEDIUM JURIS, legal remedy.
   RIGDUM-FUNNIDOS, a courtier in H. Carey’s burlesque,
        CHRONONHOTONTHOLOGOS.
   RIPE, search.
   RUDAS, a scold, a virago.
   RUG, a share, a good mouthful.

   SANCTA WINIFREDA, ORA PRO NOBIS, Saint Winifred, pray for us.
   SARTUM ATQUE TECTUM, repaired and covered.
   SAT EST, it is enough.
   SAWNEY, a nickname for a Scotchman.
   SCARBOROUGH WARNING, the blow before the threat.
   SCOWP, quaff.
   SCRUB, the name of a footman in the BEAUX’ STRATAGEM (Geo.
       Farquhar, 1704).
   SCULDUDDERY, loose, immoral.
   SEALGH, seal,
   SEA-MAWS, sea-mews.
   SECUNDUM ARTEM, according to the rules of his art.
   SEDERUNT, a sitting of the courts.
   SEMPLE, simple, not of gentle birth,
   SHILPIT, weak; poor, shabby.
   SHINGLES, thin boards used for roofs.
   SI NON CASTE, CAUTE TAMEN, if not for virtue’s sake, yet for
       caution.
   SIB, kin.
   SIGMA, the Greek S.
   SINE DIE, without a date, indefinitely.
   SIS MEMOR MEI, be mindful of me.
   SKELLOCH, screech.
   SKINKER, a server of liquor.
   SKIRL, to scream.
   SKIVIE, harebrained.
   SLEEKIT, smooth.
   SLOKEN, quench.
   SNEESHING, snuff.
   SNELL, sharp, terrible.
   SNICKERS, sniggers.
   SOCIETAS EST MATER DISCORDIARUM, partnership is the mother of
       quarrels.
   SOLITAIRE, an ornament for the neck.
   SOLON, the law-giver of Athens.
   SONSY, good-humoured, sensible.
   SORT, to chastise; to manage.
   SORTES VIRGILIANAE, Virgilian lots; opening the works of Virgil at
       random and taking the first passage read for counsel.
   SOUGH, a breath, a chant.
   SOUPLE, active; supple in mind or body.
   SOUTER’S CLOD, a kind of coarse black bread.
   SPATTERDASHES, coverings for the legs to protect them from mud.
   SPEER, ask.
   SPLICE THE MAIN BRACE, have an extra allowance of spirits.
   SPLORE, a frolic, quarrel.
   SPRATTLE, struggle, scramble.
   SPRING, a merry tune.
   SPRUSH, spruce.
   SPULE-BLADE, shoulder blade,
   SPUNK, courage, fire: SPUNKS, matches.
   STEND, take long steps.
   STEWARTRY, territory in Scotland administered by a steward.
   STIBBLER, a divinity student, a probationer.
   STILTS, plough-handles.
   STUNKARD, sullen, obstinate.
   SUA QUEMQUE TRAHIT VOLUPTAS, his own peculiar pleasure allures
       each.
   SURTOUT, a tight-fitting, broad-skirted outer coat.
   SWIPES, small beer.

   TAES, toes.
   TALIS QUALIS, of some kind.
   TAM MARTE QUAM MERCURIO, as much devoted to Mars as to Mercury (as
       much a soldier as a pleader).
   TASS, a glass.
   TAU, the Greek: T.
   TERRA FIRMA, firm earth.
   TESTE ME PER TOTUM NOCTEM VIGILANTE, I am witness as I was awake
       all night.
   TETE-A-TETE, a private conversation.
   THAIRM, catgut.
   THEMIS, the goddess of law and justice.
   THIRLAGE, mortgaging of property.
   THREAP, aver.
   THUMBIKINS, thumbscrews, instruments of torture.
   TIMOTHEUS, a famous musician.
   TIPPENY, twopenny ale,
   TIRTEAFUERA, a character in DON QUIXOTE, the doctor in Sancho
       Panza’s island government.
   TITHER, the other.
   TOD, a bush, a fox.
   TOOM, empty.
   TOUR OUT, to look about.
   TOY, a linen cap; a head-dress hanging down over the shoulders.
   TRANCES, passages.
   TUPTOWING, beating, from the Greek verb ‘tupto’, to strike.
   TWALPENNY, one penny sterling.
   TWASOME, a pair or couple.
   TYNE, loss or forfeit.
   TYRO, TYRONES, beginner, beginners; novice.

   UNCO, very, uncommon, strange.
   URGANDA, an enchantress in the romance of AMADIS OF GAUL.
   USQUEBAUGH, whisky.

   VADE RETRO, get thee behind me.
   VALE, SIS MEMOR MEI, farewell, be mindful of me.
   VARIUM ET MUTABILE SEMPER FEMINA, woman is always variable and
       changeful.
   VERBUM SACERDOTIS, the word of a priest.
   VIA FACTI, by personal force.
   VINCERE VINCENTEM, to conquer the conquering.
   VINCO VINCENTEM, ERGO VINCO TE, I conquer the conquering,
       therefore I conquer you.
   VIOLER, a player on a viol.
   VIR SAPIENTIA ET PIETATE GRAVIS, a man of much wisdom and piety.
   VIS ANIMI, strength of soul.
   VITIOUS, vicious, unruly.
   VOET, Jan Voet, author of a book on the PANDECTS.

   W.S., writer to the signet, a lawyer.
   WALING, choosing.
   WAME, stomach.
   WANCHANCY, unlucky, dangerous.
   WARE, spend.
   WARK, work, trouble.
   WAUR, worse.
   WEARS, weirs, dams.
   WEIGH-BANKS, scales.
   WHIN, gorse.
   WHITTLE, a small clasp-knife.
   WITHERSHINS, backwards in their courses, in the contrary way.
   WUD, mad.
   WYND, yard, alley.

   YAULD, active.
   YELLOCH, yell.
   YETTS, gates.
   YILL, ale.





